SECRETS
of

CLOSING
the

SALE

Other books by Zig Ziglar:
See You at the Top
Dear Family
Steps to the Top
Raising Positive Kids in a Negative World
Top Performance
Courtship after Marriage
Ziglar on Selling
Over the Top
Something to Smile About
Zig Ziglar’s Little Instruction Book
Success for Dummies
Confessions of a Happy Christian
Confessions of a Grieving Christian
Breaking Through to the Next Level
What I Learned on the Way to the Top
Something to Smile About
Something Else to Smile About
Staying Up, Up, Up in a Down, Down World
You Can Reach the Top
Life Lifters
Zig: The Autobiography of Zig Ziglar

SECRETS
of

CLOSING
the

SALE
Updated Edition

Zig Ziglar

a division of Baker Publishing Group
Grand Rapids, Michigan

© 1984, 2003 by Zig Ziglar
Published by Revell
a division of Baker Publishing Group
P.O. Box 6287, Grand Rapids, MI 49516-6287
Paperback edition published 2004
ISBN 978-0-8007-5975-9
Fifth printing, September 2008
Printed in the United States of America
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means—for example, electronic, photocopy, recording—without
the prior written permission of the publisher. The only exception is brief quotations in printed
reviews.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the hardcover edition as follows:
Ziglar, Zig.
Secrets of closing the sale / Zig Ziglar.—Updated ed.
p. cm.
Rev. ed. of: Zig Ziglar’s Secrets of closing the sale, c1984. Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 10: 0-8007-1827-5 (cloth)
ISBN 978-0-8007-1827-5 (cloth)
1. Selling I. Title.
HF5438.25.Z54 2003
658.85—dc21
2003003668
Scripture is taken from the HOLY BIBLE, NEW INTERNATIONAL VERSION®. NIV®. Copyright
© 1973, 1978, 1984 by International Bible Society. Used by permission of Zondervan. All rights
reserved.

To Bill Cranford
Who gave me my start in the world of selling and gently but forcefully
pushed me to strive for excellence and reach for new heights. He was my
friend, my brother, my mentor, and my golfing buddy. He was a great guy
and one more fine man.

Contents
Preface
Introduction to the Updated Edition
Part 1 The Psychology of Closing
1. The “Household Executive” Saleslady
2. Making “King” Customer the Winner
3. Credibility: The Key to a Sales Career
4. Commonsense Selling
5. Voice Training to Close Sales
6. The Professional Sells and Delivers
Part 2 The Heart of Your Sales Career
7. The Critical Step in Selling
8. The Big “E” in Selling
9. The Right Mental Attitude
10. Your Attitude toward You
11. Your Attitude toward Others
12. Your Attitude toward the Sales Profession
13. Building Physical “Reserves” in Selling
14. Building a Mental Reserve in Selling
15. Ya Gotta Have Love

Part 3 The Sales Professional
16. Learning and Using Professional Techniques
17. Characteristics of the Professional Salesperson
18. Here Is a Professional
19. Everybody Is a Salesperson and Everything Is Selling
Part 4 Imagination and Word Pictures
20. Imagination in Selling
21. Imagination Sells and Closes Sales
22. Using Word Pictures to Sell
23. Picture Selling for Bigger, Permanent Sales
Part 5 The Nuts and Bolts of Selling
24. Objections—The Key to Closing the Sale
25. Objections Are Consistent—Objectors Aren’t
26. The Salesman’s Friend
27. Using Objections to Close the Sale
28. Reasons and Excuses for Buying
29. Using Questions to Close the Sale
30. For Direct Sales People
Part 6 The Keys in Closing
31. Four Ideas and the Keys to Sales Success
32. Selling and Courting Run Parallel Paths
33. The “Look and Listen” Close
34. Listen—Really Listen
35. The Keys in Closing—Conclusion

36. The “Narrative” Close
Part 7 Technology and the Sales Professional
37. Technology
Thank You
Notes

Preface
Over the past fifty years it has been my privilege to be in as many actual
sales situations, selling goods, products, services, or job opportunities, as
virtually anyone who ever carried the title of salesperson. Additionally, it
has been my privilege to share the platform with and learn from some of the
greatest speakers and sales trainers our country has produced. Many of
those men are gone now, but quite a few still grace platforms around the
country. I go back to the days of Elmer Wheeler, Charlie Cullen, Frank
Bettger, Fred Herman, Charles Roth, Dick Gardner, J. Douglas Edwards,
and Percy Whiting. The list includes Cavett Robert, Red Motley, Ken
McFarland, Dan Bellus, Joe Batten, Charlie Jones, Hal Krause, Mike Frank,
Ira Hayes, Heartsill Wilson, Judge Ziglar, Thom Norman, Bill Gove, John
Hammond, Larry Wilson—and the list goes on and on.
Over these fifty years I have been a pack rat. I have taken copious notes
from many great trainers. In addition, I have clipped innumerable sales
articles from newspapers and magazines, and have learned much by
watching salespeople in action. My library includes books and manuals
from the greatest writers and trainers of the last fifty years, and I have over
a thousand hours of recordings from these and other speakers.
This background presents a rather unique problem. To be completely
honest, I sometimes forget the source of my information. To the best of my
ability, I have given credit in this book to each individual who has made a
contribution via a speech, a personal conference, a book, or an article.
Many times, however, I have no idea who my benefactor is. Additionally, I
recognize the possibility that in some instances I will credit the wrong
author or even claim originality because I learned a technique long ago and
have used it so many times that I believe the technique or idea was original.
In the event this has happened, I ask the author to forgive me. My objective
is to be completely fair with everyone.

Your own personality, conviction, and credibility in the application of the
principles and procedures in this book will be the determining factors in
your success as a salesperson, but this I promise: The procedures and
techniques I describe have worked not only for me but for countless others
as well. Many of them, as I will repeatedly emphasize throughout the book,
need alteration or adaptation to fit your sales situation, so you should
constantly ask yourself this question as you read the book: “How can I
adapt this information to fit my product to my prospect?”
I urge you to become a student as you dig into Secrets of Closing the
Sale. I’m going to be bold enough to suggest that it has taken me a lifetime
to accumulate this information and several thousand hours to assemble and
put the information into what I believe is its most effective form. With this
in mind, I don’t believe I overstate my case to point out that you probably
are not going to be able to glean all the information in one reading.
Finally, I suggest that as you read this book you’re going to realize that it
is analogous to the fisherman’s lure. Many sales books are written to catch
the fisherman—namely, the salesperson—and not to help the fisherman
catch the fish—meaning the customer. With that in mind, I emphasize that
Secrets of Closing the Sale was written to help you—the fisherman—catch
the fish and catch him in such a way that the fish (the customer) realizes he
is in good hands—yours.
I firmly believe that if you buy the ideas and concepts covered in this
book, as you apply the techniques and procedures, I will SEE YOU AT
THE TOP—of the sales ladder!

Introduction
to the Updated Edition
When Secrets of Closing the Sale was published in 1984, I was convinced
that it would be around a long time. Twenty years later I still believe it will
be around a long time. The principles, procedures, and techniques are those
that had stood the test of time long before 1984 and are still standing the
test of time. Integrity principles will always be in vogue. In view of the
recent corporate scandals in America, I believe the ethical salesperson of
today who builds a reputation on integrity will find these principles more
valuable today than ever before.
This updated edition of Secrets of Closing the Sale contains a minimal
number of changes. With the help of Michael Norton, who is gifted in
explaining the practical application of sales technology, we have added the
high-tech approach critical in today’s sales world, but the rest (with needed
updates) remains almost exactly as it was originally presented. I know these
principles and procedures still work, because I am frequently approached
after seminars by people who say, “Your book Secrets of Closing the Sale
has revolutionized my career.” One young man pointed out that his closing
percentage had gone from 16 percent to over 60 percent. That’s exciting! As
you devour these pages, making them part of your repertoire, I believe you,
too, will experience some exciting results.
It’s my conviction that of all the endeavors we can follow in life, outside
the ministry itself, professional sales requires the highest degree of
integrity. Here’s why: We are trained to persuade, and an unethical
salesperson (who is in reality a con artist) is capable of persuading people to
buy overpriced merchandise that they should not be buying at all.
Our philosophy that you can have everything in life you want if you will
just help enough other people get what they want is even truer today than it

was when the book was originally published. The objective of every sale is
to make certain the customer gets fair value, and if he gets more than fair
value, not only do you have the sale but you’ve built a customer who will,
in turn, help you build other customers.
There are many instances in this book in which you will read of people
who walked away from a sale because they knew it was not in the best
interests of the customer to buy. With this in mind, selling is much like
many sporting events. The championship tennis player hits his shot in a way
that puts him in position to hit the next shot even more effectively. The
professional golfer does the same thing, as does the pool player. Every
salesperson should think in terms of “What will be the result of this sale?
Am I building a relationship, and hence a customer, or am I just making a
few bucks at the expense of someone else?” I can assure you the last choice
is a shortcut to oblivion in the world of selling.
To be candid, I feel very protective of this profession. Because of it, I
have traveled the world over and experienced a high standard of quality,
well-balanced living that was beyond my wildest imagination when I was
growing up in Yazoo City, Mississippi. Because my gratitude is so great, I
do what I can to promote integrity and professionalism in selling.
A firm conviction that what you’re selling benefits the prospect is the
first test of integrity. If you do not believe in your product or service enough
to offer it to your own family and friends, then you should question the
value of what you are selling. As an example, I spent fifteen years in direct
sales, selling heavy-duty waterless cookware. It has been nearly forty years
since I sold my last set; however, my belief in that product was and is so
strong that I was thrilled when my best friend, Bernie Lofchick, saw to it
that as my children married, the first thing they had for their homes was a
set of heavy-duty waterless stainless-steel cookware. When my oldest
granddaughter married, my friend Dave Hurley, I’m happy to say, continued
the tradition by giving her a set of stainless-steel cookware.
As I stated in the preface, I am deeply indebted to the countless people
who helped me early in my career. Some of the real giants were willing to
share. I read their books, listened to their tapes, and became personally
acquainted with a number of them. My gratitude to them is deep and longlasting.

As you read this book, I encourage you to understand that the principles
are solid, but many will require some personalization and adaptation to fit
your specific product and your prospect’s needs. Experience, common
sense, and a studious perusal of the methods and processes contained in this
book will be very helpful. I encourage you to be that constant student, to
understand that you will not even begin to get the full gist of this book with
one reading. You should keep a notebook handy as you read, because there
will be key words and points that will jump to the surface. Mark the book.
It’s not something you want to preserve; it’s something you want to use and
“wear out” with use. I believe that as you follow the processes and put your
heart deeply into this book, you will find it will have a lifelong impact on
your sales career as well as your everyday life, because all of life is, in
reality, selling, and all of us sell every day of our lives.
Finally, I encourage you always to remember that with the exception of
small purchase items like pens, neckties, staplers, file folders, etc., the sale
is not complete until the order is signed, the merchandise is delivered and
paid for, and the customer is happy. That’s career-building selling.
How to Use This Book. The title of this book clearly indicates that it is a
book on selling for salespeople. The first chapter even more clearly
demonstrates that it is a book on persuasion and will be extremely helpful to
anyone who has to persuade others to take action of any kind (mothers,
teachers, dentists, husbands, ministers, coaches, law enforcement people,
salesmen—anyone).
In order to use this book most effectively, you need to do exactly what
the Redhead did to me.1 You need to take my words and the product I’m
talking about and translate them into your own specific sales situation. This
way you have the best of both our worlds—the information I’ve managed to
accumulate from personal experience and considerable research, combined
with the knowledge you have acquired that is specifically applicable to your
life, your product, your prospects, and your sales situation.
You need—no, you must have—a pen and a notepad in order to get the
maximum benefit from this book. It’s easy reading because it contains so
many examples, illustrations, and stories. It is not a workbook, but it is a
working-book, designed to get you involved in a learning—and not just a
reading—process.

Since Secrets is written in narrative style, complete with considerable
dialogue and humor, the reading will be easy and pleasant. In addition, this
manuscript contains over 700 questions and well over 250 sales procedures,
techniques, and closes wrapped up in nearly 100 stories, analogies, and
anecdotes.
The Book You Never Finish Reading. The first time you read Secrets, I
encourage you to move through the book quickly, with your pen in hand,
underlining or highlighting the things that really “grab” you. Don’t analyze,
but simply read as quickly as you can so you will get the complete message
and the overall view of the book.
For your second reading, you’re going to need a notepad that is
approximately the same size as the book. That will make it easier to keep
handy, even if you are on the road. I encourage you to title your notebook
the same as I have titled this book, except add your name to the front. Then
it becomes Your Secrets of Closing the Sale.
On the second reading, you will want to stop and commit to writing the
ideas generated by Secrets that you can specifically use in your own sales
career or personal life. The second reading of this book will be lengthy and
involved. Your objective is not to see how quickly you can get through the
book but what you can get out of the book.
The third reading will give you an even broader perspective of the book,
and you will add more pages and ideas to your own companion notebook.
Again, this reading will take considerable time to complete; but remember,
you are investing time, not spending it. Incidentally, I especially encourage
you to read this book early in the morning, late at night, and on weekends.
Do not take the day off from your selling to read! (The book will stick
around—the prospect might not!)
The fourth reading will make you even more aware of the more than 700
questions in Secrets. As I wrote Secrets—the dialogue and procedures
frequently reflecting my own experience in selling—the questions came
quite naturally. As I reflected on the manuscript, it was obvious to me that
the question approach to selling is a way of life for me. One other
advantage in reading the book several times is that this procedure, without

your even being aware of it, will become an integral part of you. Your
effectiveness will be greatly enhanced.
Even after the fourth reading, you will want to keep Secrets handy as a
reference. Many of the questions, procedures, techniques, and closes will
need to be read repeatedly so you can commit them to memory and make
them an integral part of your life.

PART 1

The Psychology of Closing
OBJECTIVES
To “sell” the importance of the credibility of the salesperson.
To “sell” and teach the importance of commonsense psychology in the
sales process.
To “sell” you on why you must learn to use your voice in the sales
process.
To familiarize you with the concept that sales training alone won’t make
a salesperson, but it will make a salesperson more effective.
To introduce you to a real sales pro and a series of professional sales
techniques.
CLOSES AND/OR PROCEDURES
The “Snooker” Close
The “Ownership” Close
The “Embarrassment” Close
The “1902” Close
The “Affordable” Close
The “Persuasion” Close
The “Want It” Close
The “Bride” Close
The “Alternate of Choice” Close
The “Now or Never” Close
The “Next One” Close

The “Fair Enough” Close
The “New Decision” Close
The “Voice Inflection” Close
The “Fear of Loss” Close
The “Cost” Close
The “Quality” Close
The “Reverse” Close
The “Shame” Close
The “Extra” Close
The “Add On” Close
The “Gloomy Gus” Close

1
The “Household Executive”
Saleslady
How Much Should We Invest? We moved to Dallas in 1968 and I
immediately started teaching a class in sales and motivation from nine in
the morning until nine in the evening, Monday through Saturday. I was as
busy as I’ve ever been in my life. But it was also house-buying time
because we obviously couldn’t live in a motel. The Redhead and I talked
about a house in considerable detail until we finally arrived at a
“reasonable” figure we would be willing to invest in a home. I know the
figure was “reasonable” because she assured me it was “reasonable.”
(Personally, I felt the price bore a striking resemblance to the foreign-aid
bill for the world!)
After we’d arrived at the exact amount we were going to invest in a
home, she said, “Honey, suppose we find the dream house. I mean, exactly
like we want. How much more can we invest?” That brought on a lot more
talk. So we talked and we talked and we talked and finally arrived at a
figure of an additional twenty thousand dollars. Now in this day and age,
when you talk about an additional twenty thousand dollars, you’re talking
about building a nice carport or a patio if it isn’t too big and elaborate. But
in 1968, twenty thousand dollars would build an additional two thousand
square feet of quality construction. Yes, in 1968 things were quite different.
So house-hunting that Redhead went, and I mean she really looked— at
two houses. When she walked into that second one, that ended all her
house-hunting. She had found what she wanted.

How Much Does It Cost?

That night when I got back to the motel room, there she sat on the edge
of the king-size bed. Even though she was just sitting there, the bed was
vibrating! I’ve never seen her so excited. She jumped up and said, “Honey,
I have found our dream home. It’s absolutely gorgeous! Four beautiful
bedrooms on a big lot, plenty of room in the backyard for you to build that
arrow-shaped swimming pool you’ve been talking about, walk-in closets in
every room, and four bathrooms!”
Interrupting her to squeeze in a question, I said, “Sweetheart, hold the
phone! How much does that house cost?” Sugar Baby: “Honey, you’ll have
to see it to believe it, but you’re going to love it because the den is
monstrous and it has exposed beams and a cathedral ceiling. The garage is
so big we will have room for the two cars and all our tools. Best of all,
honey, there’s an eleven-by-eleven-foot spot for you to build that little
office where you can do the writing you’ve been talking about. And, honey,
the master bedroom is so big we’re going to have to get a riding vacuum
cleaner! I’ll tell you, that is soooooome house!”

Zig (interrupting her again): “Sweetheart, how much does that house
cost?” She told me. It was eighteen thousand dollars more than the
maximum, which was already twenty thousand dollars more than we had
any business investing! Zig: “Sweetheart, there is no way we can buy a
house like that!” Sugar Baby: “Well, honey, I know that, but don’t worry
about it. You know we don’t know a thing about real estate in Dallas, so I
invited the builder to take us to the property after your class tomorrow night
so we can both look at it and get a benchmark on real estate in this area.”

Don’t Let the Prospect Fool You
Zig: “Well, I’ll be glad to look, but I’ll guarantee you that’s as far as it’s
going to go.” Sugar Baby: “I know that, so don’t worry about it.”
When we pulled into the driveway the next evening, I knew I had a
problem. When we walked in the front door, I knew I was in bad trouble!
The house was beautiful and was laid out precisely as I would have laid it
out, had I been an architect. I instantly wanted that house—badly—but what
we want and what we can get are sometimes worlds apart.
When I fully realized the situation I was in, as a protective measure I
started to treat my Redhead and the builder the same way your prospects
have been treating you all of your sales career and will continue to treat you
as long as you’re in the world of selling.
Even though I was interested, even excited about that house, I acted as if
I had no interest whatsoever. The reason is simple. I was scared to death
that between her and that builder they were going to get me to do something
I already wanted to do, was afraid I was going to do, and knew I had no
business doing. I’m talking about buying a house which I was absolutely
convinced was more expensive than we could handle. To protect myself
from myself, I acted as if I had no interest.
Many times your very best prospect will almost adamantly refuse an
appointment because he doesn’t want to “waste your time or his time.” He
is often the best prospect for the very simple reason that he knows he either
wants or needs—or both—the product, goods, or services you are selling.2
However, at this particular time he doesn’t feel he is in a position to take
action; therefore, he doesn’t want to be tempted by viewing the
demonstration or listening to your presentation. He gives you the excuse
that he doesn’t want to waste his time or yours by looking at something he
knows he can’t buy.

The “Snooker” Close
Don’t let him “snooker” you out of position. There is a lot of difference
between a prospect’s saying, “I’m not interested,” and “I really am
interested but don’t feel I can get it right now and therefore don’t want to
watch a presentation at this particular moment.” Many times the prospect is

in identically the same position I was in as I approached the front door of
the house that the Redhead was excited about.
Now I would never accuse my Redhead of secretly taking drama lessons,
but based on what happened next, I strongly suspect that she had. As we
stepped up to the front door, she turned around and made huge sweeping
motions with her arms and declared the yard perfect for the future
construction of the circular driveway I had always wanted. As we walked
inside, there was a nice chandelier in the entrance hall of the home. The
Redhead didn’t say a word, but she did come to a dead stop. It couldn’t
have been for more than a second. She turned slightly sideways, looked up,
grinned, and walked on. That’s all she needed to do. Message delivered—
message received.

The “Ownership” Close
As we walked into the den, with mounting enthusiasm she said, “Look at
the size of this den, honey, and aren’t those exposed beams gorgeous?”
Without waiting for an answer she continued, “And just look at your
fireplace with all those bookshelves around it for your books [all of a
sudden everything gets to be mine! That’s good psychology!]. I can just see
you watching the Cowboys whip up on somebody on Sunday afternoon out
of one eye while watching your fire out of the other one.”
Without pausing for breath she said, “Look back here,” as she took off in
a dead run back to the master bedroom. “Just look at the size of it, honey.
There’s plenty of room for the king-size bed, and we could put our two
chairs and table over here. It’s perfect for us, because you know how we
like to get up in the morning and have our coffee and quiet time together.
And, honey, just look in your closet. Why, even as messy as you are there’s
plenty of room for everything.”
Barely pausing for a breath, she said, “Look out here,” as she opened the
back door and pointed to the big backyard. “Plenty of room for your arrowshaped swimming pool. We can put the point of the arrow in the direction
of the garage and the diving board on the other end will still be ten feet
from the neighbor’s lot.”
As she stepped off the distance in the direction of the garage, she opened
the door and said, “Just look. Plenty of room for the two cars, and here’s

that eleven-by-eleven-foot space for you to build your office you’ve
planned for so long.” As we moved back into the house, she said, “Look at
this bedroom. Suzie will be gone from home in a couple of years and we’ll
have that guest bedroom we’ve always wanted.”
When the tour was finally over, she squeezed my hand, looked me in the
eye, and asked, “How do you feel about it, honey?”

The “Embarrassment” Close
Question: What could I say? Obviously I couldn’t say, “I don’t like it,”
because that would not have been true. So I said, “Sweetheart, I like it.
There’s no question about it; it’s a beautiful home, but you know perfectly
good and well we can’t afford a house like this.”
Did this discourage her or dampen her enthusiasm? Not in the least. She
looked at me, and with a twinkle in those beautiful, loving eyes, she said,
“Honey, I know that, but I just wanted you to see something really nice—
[pause]. Now we’ll go look at something cheap.” (Now come on, you don’t
really think she would try to embarrass me into buying a beautiful home, do
you?)
Not much else was said about the house that evening. We went back to
the motel and to bed. I got up the next morning and was in the bathroom
brushing my teeth (I know you’ll agree that when you’ve got a mouthful of
toothbrush, you’re handicapped, at least from a talking point of view) when
she walked in and said, “How long are we going to live in Dallas?”
“Wrmwrmwrmmrr years,” I replied, toothbrush still in mouth.
She couldn’t understand my garbled reply, so she asked again, “How
long?”
This time I removed my toothbrush and replied, “A hundred years. I’m
forty-two. I’m going to live to be a hundred and forty-two, so that leaves a
hundred.” Sugar Baby: “No, I mean really.” Zig: “I do, too.”

She’s “Closing” In on Me
Sugar Baby: “Honey, do you think we’ll be here thirty years?” Zig: “I’ll
guarantee it! I love Dallas, it’s centrally located for my travels, I hate to

move—we’ll be here at least thirty years, but why do you ask about thirty
years?”
Sugar Baby: “Honey, if we live here just thirty years, how much does that
eighteen thousand dollars figure out per year?” (She forgets—or ignores—
the original price of the house. She forgets about the twenty thousand too
much I felt our original commitment to a house had been. She forgets about
the interest, insurance, and taxes.)
Zig: “Eighteen thousand dollars for thirty years would be six hundred
dollars per year.” Sugar Baby: “How much is that a month?” Zig: “That
would be fifty dollars a month.” Sugar Baby: “How much is that a day?”
Zig: “Now come on, sweetheart, your arithmetic is just as good as mine. It
comes to about a dollar and seventy cents a day, but why do you ask all
these questions?” Sugar Baby: “Honey, could I ask you one more
question?”
Somehow I sensed as she stood there, all five feet, one and a half inches
of her, with a twinkle in her eye and a “Look out, honey” grin on her face,
that I was in the process of being had. But there was nothing I could do
about it.
Zig: “Why, sure.” Sugar Baby: “Honey, would you give another dollar
and seventy cents a day to have a happy wife—instead of ‘just’ a wife?”
Guess where we live?
The story demonstrates a lot of points, techniques, and psychology. First,
I knew what that Redhead was doing to me, but there was nothing I could
do about it short of being obnoxious. Like the vast majority of the people
you will be dealing with in a sales situation, I wasn’t about to treat that
Redhead in any such way. Really good technique, in the hands of a good
person (you can’t be one kind of person and another kind of salesperson), is
almost irresistible.

Translate to Your Situation
The “1902” Close
I tell this story—which is a true story—because I want you to do a lot of
things. First, I want you to translate this story to your specific situation. I
call the procedure the Redhead used on me the “1902” Close, because in

1902 a man named Frederick Sheldon described this close in his book. The
Redhead had learned that close by sitting in on some of my sales training
classes. When she heard that “1902” Close, she took it and applied it
directly to her own situation and need.

Don’t “Hear” Everything
The second lesson in the story is the fact that for some weird reason the
Redhead developed a hearing problem which I had never noticed before. I
kept saying, “Too much money, can’t afford it, not interested, can’t afford it,
not interested.” To this day I don’t think she heard a word I said. She had
already decided she wanted that house and she wasn’t going to listen to any
negative talk about not getting it. I believe most salespeople need to be a
little hard of hearing when the prospect says he’s not interested.
Think about it this way. When the prospect says, “Too high,” or “Not
interested,” he is merely saying or implying that he is not going to give you
his “big” stack of money for your “little” stack of benefits. In those cases,
be like my Redhead and become a little “hard of hearing.”
Another factor which parallels this line of thinking is the fact that not
once did that Redhead become defensive, argumentative, or antagonistic.
All the way through the presentation she was lovingly and enthusiastically
optimistic that she was going to make the sale. She never argued when I
kept talking about money, and that’s good, because arguments often create
antagonisms and it’s difficult to antagonize and positively influence at the
same time.

The “Affordable” Close
Number three. My Redhead is an optimist and knows that I am also an
optimist. She was confident I could make a bigger payment by getting
another speaking engagement or making another sale. You, too, need to be
optimistic that your prospect can handle the purchase. It is an absolute fact
that the salesman’s expectancy has a direct bearing on the prospect’s
decision in many, many cases. Expect a sale on every interview. (More on
this later.)
Number four. She asked me a lot of questions, and those questions led me
to the obvious decision that not only could we get the house but we should

get it. You can sell more by asking than telling. That’s the Socratic (after
Socrates) method, and it’s used by doctors, lawyers, accountants,
counselors, ministers, detectives, and successful people from all walks of
life.

Her Objective Was Clear
Number five. The Redhead clearly understood that she needed to make
an eighteen-thousand-dollar sale. Before she went house-hunting she had
already “sold” the price we could pay. She had even “sold” the idea of
going an additional twenty thousand dollars. As a super saleslady she knew
there was zero need to discuss what had already been decided.
The issue was clear. She had to make an eighteen-thousand-dollar sale. If
you are in real estate and the prospect tells you he can go $200,000 for a
house, then as a practical matter you have just gotten an order for $200,000.
Your “selling” takes place only in the sense that you have to “sell” the
prospect on a particular house in a particular location, and then you have to
“sell” the owner on accepting your buyer’s offer, which is almost always
lower than the asking price.
Your major selling takes place when you find what the buyer wants and
needs, but at a price tag of $250,000 instead of the $200,000 which your
prospect says is his maximum price. If you clearly understand that you need
to make a $50,000 sale and not a $250,000 sale, your task will be much
easier. Actually, your prospect “bought” $200,000, and you had little or
nothing to do with it. His needs made the purchase from you or someone
else mandatory.
The same thinking needs to be applied to any product on the market. If
your prospect wants to invest X dollars but his needs come to X-plus
dollars, then your real sale is the amount beyond what the prospect had
already committed, in his own mind, to invest.
As I say, the Redhead had a sales job now of selling just the eighteen
thousand dollars. She knew that if we talked about the eighteen thousand
dollars plus the twenty thousand dollars plus the original price plus the
taxes, insurance, and interest, I would get financial indigestion. With this in
mind, she took the extra amount, the eighteen thousand dollars, and broke it
into such small units that it wouldn’t even require a financial Pepto-Bismol.

The late sales trainer J. Douglas Edwards called this the “reduction to the
ridiculous.”
She knew that within reason I would get her just about anything she
really wanted, and she also knew that I was optimistically confident I could
work harder, sell more, or secure another speaking engagement to pay for
the house. Finally, the Redhead had worked with our budget long enough to
know that regardless of how often you’re paid or how you’re paid, you
spend money on a daily basis in order to live. She simply broke it down on
a per-day basis, using figures she knew I could understand and felt
confident I could handle. She did not let the why we should buy serve as a
stumbling block to the how we could buy it. Point: Break the price down
into small amounts so your prospects can afford it. Make it easy for them to
buy.

Know Something about Your Prospects
Number six, you cannot get to know all of your prospects as well as the
Redhead knew hers, but you should get as much advance information as is
humanly possible. She also knew a great deal about what I wanted. She
knew, for example, that as a child one day in a fit of anger I had said I was
going to build a swimming pool, a big one. Here are the circumstances.
As a boy in Yazoo City, Mississippi, I was invited one day to go
swimming with a buddy at the country club, which had the only swimming
pool in town. I rode my bicycle to the club on that hot summer day, and
since I had my bathing suit on I was ready to swim. My buddy didn’t show.
That was more temptation than I could deal with, so into the pool I went.
One of the club members was walking by the pool as he was playing a
round of golf. He saw me and knew I wasn’t a member, so he promptly
threw me out of the pool. He “invited” me to come down to his office the
next day and talk about it. I’d never been so frightened in my life. I was
afraid to go and more afraid not to go. I honestly thought I was gong to go
to jail for my “crime.”
He was pretty hard on me. As a matter of fact, I left his office in tears.
That day I made a strong statement as children will sometimes do. I
declared then and there, “One of these days I’m going to build a swimming

pool bigger than the one they’ve got at the country club in Yazoo City,
Mississippi.”
I said this in a moment of anger and I didn’t really believe it. Later on in
life, however, when things started happening to me in a beautiful way and
my career took off, the dream was reborn, and in 1969 we built a swimming
pool in our backyard which is exactly one foot longer than that old original
pool at the country club in Yazoo City.
What I’m suggesting is basic. Learn as much as you can about your
prospect and capitalize on that information. Learn how to use voice
inflections, which we will thoroughly cover throughout Secrets. Break the
price into small segments. Optimistically sell, and be hard of hearing. Ask
questions to identify the problem and lead the prospect to the decision. Find
out what he needs to solve his problem, and show him how he can solve his
problem with your product.

Three Things the House Didn’t Have
The seventh lesson in the sales story is this. When we moved from
Columbia, South Carolina, to Dallas, one of the things I shared with the
Redhead was the fact that when we bought our next house she could make
most of the choices as far as style, location, materials, and the “little extras”
which would personalize “our” home. However, I did want to have three
things in that house and she could have everything else. First of all, I
wanted that arrow-shaped swimming pool which I’ve mentioned already.
Second, I wanted a small office so I could write the book I had been talking
about but doing nothing about. And third, I wanted a circle drive.
When we bought our house it had a lot of beautiful features, but there
were three things the house did not have. Now, my reading friend, you
know what three things were missing. However, the “saleslady,” that
Redhead, carefully pointed out where we could build a swimming pool,
exactly where the office was going to be built, and the exact path for the
circle drive.
This truly is a major point. Many times a prospect will ask you for
something very specific. Now if you have exactly what he wants, then you
should fill that bill. But please remember that many people do not know
what they want because they do not know what is available. In short, if you

cannot fill the bill exactly, do not assume they are so adamant they would
not even consider anything else.
From time to time, all of us have gone shopping for a specific item,
couldn’t find it, and ended up buying something else which we really enjoy
much more. Just because the house did not contain those items I wanted did
not eliminate the house as a good one to buy. The Redhead simply pointed
out that we could add those things later and we could build them exactly
like we wanted them and not how some builder might have built them. This
really translates into using your imagination to help the prospect get what
he wants. Remember:

You can have everything in life you want if you will just help
enough other people get what they want.

2
Making “King” Customer
the Winner
Hold the Phone! STOP: Don’t read another word unless you have that pen
I discussed at the beginning. Throughout Secrets you and I are going to be
involved in a learning-motivational experience that will enable you to sell
more of whatever you sell. You need that pen from “hello” to “good-bye,”
because you will need to circle, underline, mark, and make notes on
virtually every page of this book, as well as in the notebook you need for
the second reading. Secrets of Closing the Sale is an easy, fun-to-read book,
but my major objective as the author is not to inform or to entertain but to
get you heavily involved in a growth-and-action process that will be
stimulating and financially rewarding.
If you have that pen handy, we’ll get started because you are ready to
grow. If you don’t have the pen ready to use, I need to ask you a question.
Did you buy the book because you were curious, knew the author, or were
looking for a miracle? Or because you wanted to further your career by
effectively making more sales or persuading others to take specific action?
If it was the latter—and I surely hope it was—you’re in luck, because
this book contains proven methods and techniques which have worked for
others and will work for you if you get involved in the learning and doing
process. That’s a big if, but it will play the key role in whether you write
“sold” or “missed” on many of your future interviews.

It’s Not Easy
It takes work to become a professional salesperson or to substantially
improve your closing percentage while building customers instead of just

making sales. Work—a lot of work—is required if you are going to fully
develop your sales potential.
This goes far beyond just reading the script, but to put your mind at least
partially at ease, let me assure you that one trip through these pages will
definitely have considerable value. You will pick up thoughts, ideas, and
feelings which will reinforce many things you already feel and believe but
have not articulated. You will learn power phrases and specific words which
will make what you are already using even more effective. You will be
motivated to do more and use more of what you already have, and your
sales will probably improve before you finish the first reading. You will
pick up new psychological insights which will help you to understand why
prospects “respond” or “react” as they do to certain techniques and
procedures.
This is especially important, because if you know how to do something—
and then do it—you will always have a job. But if you know why it is done,
you will be the boss or, in this case, the sales leader.
Of even more importance, you will pick up attitudes and feelings about
selling and the sales profession which will make an immediate difference in
your productivity and your long-term career in the most exciting profession
(my opinion and that of most truly successful salespeople) in America.

Convince—Then Persuade
Perhaps the most frustrating experience a salesperson has is to gain
agreement from the customer that yes, the product is good; yes, it will save
money; yes, he does need it; yes, he would like to have it; yes, he really
could afford the payments; but no, he is not going to buy. Many times this
indicates that the prospect has been convinced of the merits— or at least
appears to be convinced and “sold”—but he has not been persuaded to take
action.
Aristotle is considered one of the most brilliant thinkers of all time, but
he had one belief which was completely in error. He believed if two
different weights of the same material were dropped from the same height,
they would fall at different rates of speed. This belief was taught at the
University of Pisa. Years later Galileo entered the picture, challenged this
theory, and started saying the opposite. The other professors and students

were astonished that Galileo would dare refute what the great Aristotle had
taught. They challenged him to prove his position.
Galileo did so by going to the top of the Leaning Tower of Pisa with two
different weights of the same material. He dropped them together and they
hit the ground at precisely the same time. He convinced the students and
professors beyond any doubt that he was right and Aristotle was wrong. But
guess what they kept teaching at the University of Pisa?
You’re right. They continued to teach Aristotle’s theory. Galileo had
convinced them but he had not persuaded them. The questions are: (a) How
do you persuade people? and (b) What is persuasion? The answers are: (a)
You don’t “tell” them, you “ask” them; and (b) persuasion derives from the
French, “to give good advice in advance.” In the following example I will
specifically demonstrate the question-asking technique. Throughout Secrets
we explore and demonstrate the role the sales professional plays in the
process of becoming a “counselor” or assistant buyer who truly gives “good
advice in advance.” In the process of touching all the sales bases, as I
indicated earlier, you will encounter over 700 questions. Now, the example.

The “Persuasion” Close
These questions are ridiculously simple—but it is critical that you answer
them because this will clarify your thinking and set the tone for the entire
book. What you answer will bear directly on your attitude and hence your
success as a salesperson. Please use that pen, which you now have in your
hand, and answer these simple questions one at a time:
Question:
Question:
Question:
Question:
Question:

Do you sell a pretty good product? Yes No
Do you sell an exceptionally good product? Yes No
Do you sell a product that solves a problem or problems? Yes No
Do you feel you deserve a profit when you sell a product that solves a problem? Yes
No
Do you feel you deserve two profits when you sell two products that solve two
problems? Yes No

Chances are excellent you answered yes to all of these questions. What
you’re really saying is you honestly feel that the more problems you solve,
the more profit you deserve. That’s the way it should be.
Question:

Have you been selling for as long as one year? Yes No

Question:

If yes, do you still have all the money you earned in your last twelve months as a
salesperson? Yes No

I think it would be safe to say your answer to that last question is no.
Question:

Do you have customers to whom you sold over a year ago who are still using and
enjoying the benefits of what you sold to them at that time? Yes No

If you answered yes, and in most cases you probably did, then the next
question is, who was the biggest winner, you or the customer? Now if the
customer is the biggest winner, who ought to say thank you to whom at the
conclusion of the transaction?
Chances are fairly good that you spent all or most of your profit or
commission shortly after you made the sale (if not before). Chances are also
excellent that your prospect or customer used and benefited from what you
sold him for weeks, months, or maybe even years. If you are selling a
legitimate product that solves a problem and you sell it at a fair price, the
customer makes the best deal.
Question:

Is the sales process something you do to somebody or something you do for
somebody?

(This is one of the most important and profound issues I will explore in
Secrets. Your answer reveals everything about where your heart and
interests lie in the world of selling.)
If, in your heart, you really feel the sales process is something you do to
the prospect, then you are a manipulator. The dictionary defines
manipulate: “to control the action of, by management; also, to manage
artfully or fraudulently.” Manipulation: “skillful or dexterous management,
sometimes for purpose of fraud; state of being manipulated.” I’ll be the first
to admit that manipulators make sales, but in my fifty plus years in the
profession I have never known even one manipulator who was successful in
the profession. (As you read Secrets you will discover my definition of
success.)
If, in your heart, you feel the sales process is something you do for the
prospect, then this book will represent a significant addition to your sales

library. Your benefits will be considerable because you are truly interested
in benefiting others.
The world of selling is often the exact opposite of the world of athletics. I
fought in the ring for two years. As a matter of fact, the only reason I quit
was my hands—the referee kept stepping on them! One of the first things
the coach taught me when I got into the ring was, “Zig, find the opponent’s
weakness and exploit it; find out where his defenses are weak and capitalize
on them; take advantage of him.” In football, the quarterback is told to
probe, to find out where the other team is weak and exploit that weakness.
In athletic competition you look for the opponent’s weakness so you can
exploit it.
In the world of selling you look for the opponent’s (prospect’s) weakness
(need) so you can strengthen it by selling him your goods or services. Yes,
the sales process is something we do for the prospect and not to the
prospect. Conclusion: If you are truly professional, you will seek every
legitimate means for persuading the prospect to take action for his or her
benefit.

The Winner and Still Champion—“King” Customer
I used the preceding series of questions to establish in your mind that the
customer really is the one who benefits the most. (I’m obviously assuming
the product is legitimate, is fairly priced, and will perform as expected.)
Now let’s reverse that process and assume that, instead of asking you those
questions, I had simply said to you, “Let’s face it, my selling friend. As
everybody knows, the customer is the big winner.” Many of you would
have agreed, but a high percentage of you would have thought facetiously,
Yeah, they are the big winners, all right, but then I didn’t do too badly
myself! You would probably have this thought with a satisfied and mildly
sarcastic chuckle under your breath.
The method I used, however, is simple and clear because I did not
attempt to “tell” or “sell” you anything. If I had, you might have resisted.
By my asking you questions, there’s no way you can get unhappy with me
about the answers you give to those questions.
Now let’s translate this to your situation with your customers. When you
ask or use this particular procedure, the customer is actually persuading

himself. There is no resentment and therefore the chance of his taking
action—which is your objective—is much higher. Use the question
technique. It works.

Here’s Why They Won’t—or Don’t—Buy
There are five basic reasons people will not buy from you. These are: no
need, no money, no hurry, no desire, and no trust. Since any “reason” or
“excuse” for not buying will cost you a sale—and will cost the prospect the
benefits he would accrue from the purchase—the missed sale is a loss for
both buyer and seller.
Now because a missed sale is expensive to both buyer and seller, let’s
look carefully at each reason a prospect does not buy from you. By
identifying and then effectively dealing with each of them, your sales
effectiveness, and hence your service to your prospects, will increase. This
translates into more profit for you because it means benefits to more people.
One of the five reasons prospects will not buy from you is they do not
feel they need what you are selling.
If everybody belonged to the old, old, old school of thought which says,
“We should buy only what we need,” then you and all other salespeople
would be in serious trouble. I say this because most people have
considerably more of everything than they “need.” (How many clothes,
how much floor space, how much car, how many TVs, how much food do
you need?) Fortunately for us, and in most cases for the prospect, we buy
what we want or desire. I deal with desire or lack of it as the fourth reason
the prospect will not buy from you.
Now let’s get back to the question of need and what it really means when
the prospect says no. In many cases, if not most, the prospect says no
because he doesn’t know enough to say yes. More on this later.
The second reason most people do not buy is they don’t have any money
(and there are people who really don’t have any—or enough—money). You
can use all the techniques in the world and you still are not going to
manufacture the money itself. Having made that observation, let me now
state that I do not want to disillusion anyone, especially if you are new in
the world of selling. When it comes to money, some people will actually lie

to you when they say they don’t have any—or enough—to buy what you
are selling. (I’ll bet you have a suspicion you’ve already met some of those
folks.)

The “Want It” Close
This little story verifies that point. Many years ago, when I first entered
the world of selling, I was calling on a Funderburk family in Lancaster
County, South Carolina. They raised chickens and sold eggs. I demonstrated
a set of cookware for them and several of their friends. It was a complete
demonstration and, since it was in their home, I had a chance to look
through their cabinets and see the amount of cookware they did not have.
Their need for a good set of cookware was obvious. I tried for two solid
hours to make the sale but never came close. Mrs. Funderburk kept saying,
“No money, too expensive, can’t afford it!” She sounded like a broken
record!
Then somehow, somewhere, somebody said something about fine china.
I don’t know if it was Mrs. Funderburk or me. At the mention of fine china,
Mrs. Funderburk’s eyes lit up like the proverbial Christmas tree and the
following dialogue took place.
Mrs. Funderburk: “Do you have fine china?” Zig (smiling): “We just
happen to have the finest china in the whole world!” (At least that’s the way
I saw it!) Mrs. Funderburk: “Do you have any with you?” Zig (getting up to
make a mad dash to the car): “You’re in luck!”
A few minutes later I was leaving the Funderburk home with an order for
china which involved substantially more dollars than the cookware which I
had been trying to sell. Actually, no “selling” was involved. It was just a
question of choosing the china pattern she preferred and working out the
financial arrangements.
Question: If she bought the china which cost more than the cookware
which was “too expensive” and which she “couldn’t afford,” was she lying
when she said she didn’t have the money? Interesting question, isn’t it?
Actually, the answer is yes, she was lying—and I’m one of those purists
who believes that a lie is a lie is a lie.

However, the purpose of this book is to help you persuade more people to
take action in their own best interests, so let’s move over to the customer’s
side of the table where we can think her thoughts, feel her feelings, and
become an assistant buyer. (This is important whether you sell china, cars,
computers, or anything else.)
When Mrs. Funderburk was saying she had no money and couldn’t afford
the cookware, she was completing the sentence to herself in this manner: “I
don’t have any money for that cookware because I don’t want the set of
cookware.” Thus she rationalized that she was actually “telling the truth,”
even though she was telling part of it so quietly no one else could hear it!
The key in situations like this is probing to uncover the real reason she
was not buying the cookware. In this case the reason for not buying was no
desire for ownership and not a shortage of money. I deal with this probing
technique throughout this book. Mrs. Funderburk bought the china because
(1) she really wanted it; (2) she trusted me as a person; and (3) I was
courteously persistent in my role as probing assistant buyer and, in the
process, she revealed her desire to own fine china and not the cookware.

People Buy What They Want
The minute she saw that beautiful china, she said (to herself), I’ve got
money for that set of china because I want that set of china. Realistically,
she desperately needed the cookware and would have used it daily for life.
She probably used that china only a few times each year, if that often, BUT
SHE WANTED THAT CHINA. Critical sales point:

People buy what they want when they want it more than they want
the money it costs.
Let me sum it up as we explore the best way to build a sales career.
People are going to buy, in most cases, what they really want—not
necessarily what they need. It is your opportunity and responsibility to sell
the legitimate benefits of your goods and services in a legitimate manner so
your prospect will want to buy from you, again and again.

It’s Possible to Back Up—and Go Forward

The third reason a lot of people don’t buy is this: They’re just not in a
hurry. It doesn’t matter to them whether they buy today—or next year. In
essence, they are often thinking, and sometimes asking, “What do you
mean, I’ve got to buy today? I’m thirty-nine years old. I’ve lived all of my
life without this earth-shattering product. You’re not just passing through
town, are you?” Or “I mean, you are going to be here, aren’t you? You’re
not closing your doors, are you? What’s your hurry?” Realistically, no hurry
is one of the toughest objections to deal with. Since getting prospects
interested enough to take action today is a major objective, I’ll deal with
this objection throughout the book.

The “Bride” Close
Here’s one effective technique for getting people off dead center. Early in
my sales career I learned to agree with the prospect, and it has been very
productive for me. Here’s the way it works. If I was making little or no
progress after making a substantial effort to persuade the prospect to take
action, I would smile and say, “You know, Mr. Prospect, as I review your
situation and think back on my own experiences in life, I believe that
perhaps you are right. Maybe you should wait. I know in my own life, when
my wife and I got married, we made a financial mistake. Getting married
costs money, and any time you spend money you might well be making a
mistake.
“For example, had we waited just twenty more years, we could truly have
had a honeymoon to end all honeymoons! When we started our family, it
was a mistake. It did—and does—cost money. Had we waited just another
ten or fifteen years, we could have given the children so much more. When
we bought our first house, that was a mistake. Had we waited another
twenty or thirty years, we truly could have built a much nicer home. The
only problem, Mr. Prospect, with waiting until everything is just right
before you take action is that you might wind up like the two people in this
poem”:
The bride, white of hair, is stooped over her cane,
Her footsteps—uncertain—need guiding.
While down the opposite church aisle with a wan, toothless smile
The bridegroom in wheelchair comes riding.
Now who is this elderly couple, thus wed?
Well, you’ll find when you’ve closely explored it

That here is that rare, most conservative pair
Who waited “till they could afford it!”
From Timid Salesmen Have Skinny Kids by Judge Ziglar

After the poem I would pause and quietly say, “Mr. Prospect, there is
seldom a ‘perfect’ time to do anything, and if you wait until all the lights
are on green before you head for town, you’re going to stay at home the rest
of your life! The Chinese say that a journey of a thousand leagues begins
with a single step. You and I both know that ownership of this product
begins with the decision to own it. Actually, the only decision you need to
make at this moment is whether or not you can handle this first payment,
and you’ve already indicated the first payment is no problem. Since you
want it, can you think of any reason you should not, at this moment, treat
you and your family as well as you deserve to be treated?”

The “Alternate of Choice” Close
In direct sales, smile and ask, “Shall I ask the company to ship it as soon
as possible, or would two weeks be better?” In store or service-center sales,
smile and ask, “Would you like to take it with you, or should we send it
out?” (That’s “Alternate of Choice.” Never give the prospect a choice
between something and nothing. Let him choose between something and
something else. This close is used under many circumstances, as you will
see.)

They Buy—If They Really Want It
Then there’s the fourth reason a lot of people don’t buy from you: They
do not really want what you are selling. Most salespeople—and that
certainly includes me—find it inconceivable that anybody would not want
what they’re selling. And that’s good! If you did not feel that way, I can
assure you that with few exceptions you would not be a successful
salesperson. (If you’re selling caskets, we’re going to “need” one eventually
but most people will not “want” one at that moment.)
Your belief in your product should be so strong it would be impossible
for you to understand how anybody could possibly not want what you’re
selling! Realistically, however, some people don’t. When we deal with
refusal and rejection, you will be given the details on how to handle this so

you will understand that the prospect has refused your offer and has not
rejected you personally.

The “Now or Never” Close
When I think of desire, I think of an incident which happened to me early
in my sales career. I had demonstrated a set of cookware for a widow living
in the little town of Elgin, South Carolina. After I finished the
demonstration, she asked the price. When I told her, she acted as if she were
going to have a heart attack! She loudly moaned, “Oh, I could never buy
that cookware! Why, Mr. Ziglar,” she said, “I’m a widow. I live by myself.
Every morning I eat breakfast with my son and his wife who live in the
little house next door. I have lunch at the mill and I don’t eat any dinner. I
work six days a week. The only time I would really use that set of cookware
would be on Sunday.” She continued, “I’m getting close to retirement age.
The only thing I’m going to have is Social Security, which is not much. It
would be the most foolish thing in the world for me to even consider buying
that set of cookware!”
She gave me every reason in the world for not buying. Then she looked
at me and, giving me one of the most beautiful smiles I’ve ever seen, said,
“But you know, Mr. Ziglar, all of my life I’ve wanted a nice set of pots. And
if I don’t order now I know I’ll never have them. I’ll take them!”
She had given me every reason for not buying. Then she bought because
she had that lifetime desire to own a really nice, matched set of cookware.
Coupled with that desire for ownership was the very real fear that if she
didn’t “buy now” she would never have the cookware, which meant she
would have missed or “lost” something very important to her. It’s a
psychological fact that “the fear of loss is greater than the desire for gain.”
(I emphasize this fact several times in this book.)
The only part I played in this scenario was to be in the right place at the
right time with the right product. In addition, I kept quiet while she was
voicing her objections. This made her feel better and helped her “talk
herself” into buying.
Until that moment I thought I believed in the set of cookware I was
selling. My meeting with this widow who had dreamed of ownership made
it crystal clear to me how important belief and the desire for ownership

really are. How sad it would be for you and the prospect to miss a sale
because your own belief and desire to help the prospect own your product is
not at least as intense and deep as that of the prospect.
They Buy—If They Trust
The fifth reason the prospect does not buy is the most significant: no
trust. This one is very difficult to pinpoint and identify with certainty
because very few people are going to say specifically, “Look, friend, you
know you’re lying to me. Why don’t you go ahead and admit it? You know
your product won’t do all the things you’re claiming.”
It’s highly unlikely that the prospect will call you a liar, but if he thinks
or feels you are lying, the results will be the same. He won’t buy. In most
cases that feeling of distrust is slight—very slight, but if it’s there at all, it
could—and probably will—cost you the sale.
According to a study conducted by the New York Sales and Marketing
Club, 71 percent of the people who buy from you do so because they like
you, trust you, and respect you. The word trust includes “us.” A bond must
be formed between you and the prospect before anything significant will be
bought or sold.
Point: You’ve got to establish that trust and respect with your prospects if
you expect to be a sales professional. This should be obvious, but in case
it’s not, I’ll spell it out. Again, you cannot be one kind of person and
another kind of salesperson. You must be consistent in all areas of life if you
are going to achieve maximum results in building your sales career. That’s
one of the major reasons we deal with the entire person rather than just the
salesperson throughout this book. This is one of the “not-so-little” things
that make the buying difference in the prospect’s mind.
Based on overwhelming evidence (the Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance
study; the Harvard University study by Dr. Robert Coles; Corporate
Bigamy by Mortimer Feinberg and Richard Dempewolff; The Forum
Corporation Report; The Cox Report; and others) the feeling is strong that
corporate America will progressively and quickly move toward giving
preferential treatment to those job applicants who have a solid moral
integrity base on which to build a career. That’s any kind of legitimate
career, but especially a sales career.

A persuasive but immoral salesperson can smooth-talk a lot of people
into wanting and buying cheap or useless merchandise or services at
inflated prices. When that happens, we have not one, not two, but three
losers.
The customer loses money and a certain amount of faith in mankind. The
salesman loses self-respect and sacrifices any possibility of a truly
successful sales career for temporary financial gain. The profession of
selling loses prestige and the confidence of the general public when any of
its members betray public trust by using professional persuasion skills in
the deceitful practice of selling inferior merchandise at inflated prices to
gullible, uninformed, or misinformed buyers.
It is my strong conviction that your sales career, or for that matter your
career in anything, started when you reached the age of accountability. If
integrity is as much a part of you as your head, then success in selling will
be much easier and faster, and it will be solid and long lasting. That’s the
reason I will repeatedly emphasize that the most important part of the sales
process is the salesperson.3

3
Credibility: The Key
to a Sales Career
Our Tastes and Wants Are Similar. Salespeople the world over are inclined
to say, “Yeah, but my situation is different, my prospects are different, my
product is different.” That may be true, but there are a tremendous number
of similarities and I believe you will convince yourself of that fact by
playing a little game and answering these questions as I ask them:
1. Stop reading and hold up three fingers of your writing hand.
2. Think of a flower and don’t change your mind.
3. Now think of a piece of furniture.
4. Think of a color.
5. Think of a number between one and ten.
Answers
1. The odds are overwhelming that you held up all but your thumb and
little finger (96 percent do).
2. Chances are nearly even that you thought of a rose.
3. Chances are one in three that you thought of a chair.
4. With dozens to choose from, chances are over 60 percent that you
selected red.
5. Chances are nearly one in four that you thought of seven.
What I am saying is this: There are a tremendous number of similarities
in our habits and our way of thinking as people. There are also many

similarities in what all our prospects—regardless of what they do or where
they live—want out of life. One thrust of this book is to deal with, and take
advantage of, those similarities so we can persuade other people to act in
their own best interests.
My good friend and fellow sales trainer John Hammond teaches
salespeople to stand up, put their hands on their shoulders, and sweep away
that little sales-killing devil who is whispering in their ears, “Your situation
is different so this doesn’t apply to you.”
I encourage you to do literally the same thing. These methods and
techniques are not on trial. They work when you master them and use them.

The “Law of Averages”
Unlike most sales trainers, I will have very little to say about the “law of
averages.” Chances are excellent you have been told by your sales manager
almost from the beginning that if you see enough people you will make
some sales. “Yes, sir,” you were told, “the ‘law of averages’ will take care
of you! You make those calls and you will make those sales.” I was even
told that you could take an order pad, tie it to a dog’s tail, and if he ran
around town long enough somebody would stop him and sign the order!
I’m certain the author of that statement knew it was an exaggeration, but it
makes the point that calls produce sales and no calls produce no sales. So
far I agree.
Overall, the law of averages is dependable, but on occasion it is
misleading. For example, if you put one foot in a bucket of ice water and
one foot in a bucket of boiling water, on the average you will not be
comfortable. And obviously, you can drown in a lake which has an
“average” depth of six inches.
My good friend and colleague Mike Frank, who has made, by actual
count, over 19,000 “warm” calls (negative folks call them “cold” calls),
points out that the key to dealing successfully with averages is to (1) make
enough calls or presentations; (2) be as effective as possible on every call;
and (3) make mental and/or written notes on every call as to what you did
right, what you could have done better, and how you can make your next
presentation even more effective.

The “Next One” Close
I’m convinced that salespeople all over the world—including you —are
not interested in the law of averages. Question: What would you like to
have happen on your next sales interview? You would like to make a sale,
wouldn’t you? What about the one after that? And the one after that?
The point is clear, isn’t it? You don’t care a thing about the law of
averages! You are just like this old farmer down home. He did not want all
the land—but he did want the land that was next to his! You probably don’t
want all the sales, but you do want the next one. This book was written to
help you make that next sale, and to make it in such a way that your new
customer is willing and even anxious to help you build your sales career.
How do you make the sale to the person you deal with next? In my
judgment, you start and finish with trust on most sales you make and on all
the cliff-hangers (the tough ones). While I will also deal with no need, no
money, no hurry, and no desire, trust and credibility will get a considerable
amount of space in this book.

Credibility Is Critical
Here’s an example of why I said we would be dealing with the kind of
person you are as well as the kind of salesperson you are. I don’t mean to
upset or offend you, but I can teach the average twelve-year-old many of
the techniques and procedures you know and use in sales interviews.
However, at this stage of the game, he would not be very effective in selling
most of the products you sell.
Here’s why: Can you imagine a twelve-year-old saying to a prospect,
“Now, Mr. and Mrs. Anderson, our market analysis reveals that the average
sales price of the homes in this area for the past twelve months is $196,500.
However, our projections convince me that the current trend of the market
as well as the movement of the city will give us an average increase in
value of 11 percent in this area for the next nine years, which simply . . .”?
Can you imagine a twelve-year-old spouting that kind of stuff and having
a prospect sitting there saying, “Yeah, that’s right, young man, I believe I’ll
buy that $196,500 house you showed me yesterday”? It’s not that the

prospect wouldn’t believe him, but there’s an area of credibility which
leaves something to be desired, is there not?
Now an even more serious credibility gap exists if you, an adult, are not
the right kind of person. In a nutshell, if you have a character defect, if your
integrity is deficient, you will miss a lot of the close ones. (The prospect’s
fear of loss is greater than his desire for gain, and most prospects know that
you can’t make a good deal with a bad guy.) Your product or service has to
have overwhelming advantages in order for you to sell successfully with a
shortage of integrity. Even then the success is temporary, because a
company smart enough to acquire product advantage is too smart to throw
that advantage away with character-defective salespeople.

What Is the Commission?
Now before we go any further, you need to answer this question: In your
trade area, what is your average commission on the sales you almost make?
Now when I say “almost,” I mean if you really get close with the prospect
actually having his pen in his hand to sign. What’s the commission?
I’ll bet it’s the same in your area as it is in mine—and that’s a big, fat
nothing! In other words, close doesn’t count except in horseshoes and
grenades. You’ve got to make the sale, regardless of where you live, if
you’re going to get the commission. Of course, that’s fair, because when
you just barely make the sale, the company is not going to pay you part of
the commission because you barely made the sale.
Interestingly enough, the word close, as in horseshoes, is spelled the
same way as “close the sale,” but the difference between being “close to the
sale” and “closing the sale” is dramatic. Undoubtedly the most frustrating
thing a salesperson experiences is to get so close to a sale he can taste it but
still end up missing it. Personally, I’d rather have him say, “No, I don’t want
to buy it and that’s final,” and almost run me off than to get close and miss.
Getting close can have you climbing the walls if it happens very often.

Psychology (Common Sense) Is Involved
This is not a book on psychology, but I can absolutely guarantee you that
you’re going to have to know some psychology (or common sense) if

you’re going to be a truly professional salesperson. One theme which will
repeatedly be emphasized is this:

You can have everything in life you want if you will just help
enough other people get what they want.
Let me emphasize that if you have ever closed even one sale, I’m not
going to be teaching you how to close. You already know how to do that.
What I would like to do is improve your percentage of closes in the
interviews, presentations, or demonstrations you conduct. You can improve
your closing percentage by understanding three very important things.
Number one, good closing comes from good selling and good selling comes
from good people. (Question: Are you a “good people”?) Number two, this
book is designed to help you develop what I call a “closing instinct.”
Number three, you will learn many specific new closes.
This instinct or intuition, which women have developed to a much finer
point than men, is important in selling and can be developed by men and
women. When your prospect gives you those buying signals indicating he is
on the verge of making that yes decision, you need to move in instinctively
and become the “assistant buyer” we will be talking about. You need to
assist him in solving his problem, which he can do by buying your products,
goods, or services.
If you could improve your closing percentage by 10 percent (and I’m
confident that if your closing percentage is less that 60 percent, 10 percent
is a realistic figure), your additional volume would be substantial, or your
time for other pursuits would be dramatically increased.
For example, if you are in direct sales and talk with twenty people each
week or one thousand people each year, an increase of 10 percent would be
one hundred more sales. The additional volume and earnings would make a
real difference in your lifestyle, and your cost of doing business would be
almost the same. A 10 percent increase in your closing percentage could
increase your net income 20 percent if you currently close 50 percent of
your interviews and 100 percent if you are closing only 10 percent of your
interviews.

If you improve your effectiveness 10 percent, the other one hundred sales
would represent five solid weeks of work without spending any additional
time on the job. This could mean that you would have five extra weeks to
do the things you enjoy doing or to prepare yourself professionally to move
higher up the ladder with your company. It obviously could also mean
additional time with your family, which in our society today is needed more
and more and is a must if you expect to achieve total success.

There’s More to It Than Closing
As we talk about closes, I would like to emphasize something which I
consider tremendously important. For some reason, the close has gotten to
be the “glamour” part of the sales process. Many people labor under the
illusion that if they can just master the right closing technique they can
dramatically improve their productivity. Obviously, it would help sales to
know how to close and to use those techniques. However, I would like to
say that the close is no more, or no less, important than any other phase of
the sales process.
If you don’t have a prospect, how are you going to close? If you don’t
know how to make an appointment, how are you going to close? If your
qualification process or presentation is weak, regardless of how many
closes you use, in our sophisticated society you’re not going to be able to
“pressure” many people into buying. If you do, you will have a
cancellation, or even worse, a disgruntled customer. So, in reality, the close
is one part of the process. Since it is the final part, it has been given a
disproportionate burden to carry as far as the sale is concerned. My saying
this might puzzle you a bit because of the title and structure of this book.
But I simply want to keep things in perspective; you must be effective in all
phases of the sales process if you’re going to build a rewarding sales career.

I have frequently had salespeople say they could get prospects, secure
appointments, and tell a good story, but couldn’t close the sale.
Interpretation: They can’t sell. As John M. Wilson of National Cash
Register fame would say, “There is no such thing as a good salesman who is
a poor closer.” Another trainer put it this way: “Selling without closing is
like lathering without shaving.” Friend, if you can’t close, you can’t sell.
Period.
When you get a qualified prospect, you’re on first base. When you make
the appointment, you’re on second base. When you make an effective
presentation, you’re on third base. If you go no further, all you’ve done is
waste the time of the prospect as well as your own. Until you move to home
plate with the close, you haven’t done anything constructive for anyone.
In selling, as in baseball, you must touch all the bases. Even if the batter
knocks the ball out of the park, if he doesn’t touch every base, he won’t
score.
The close, to continue the analogy, is the score, and it is important
because it converts invested time to profitable time. I insist that the close is
no more important than any other phase of the sales process; however,
without the close the rest of the process is wasted.

Closing is largely an attitude firmly grounded in solid sales technique.
That’s the reason so much space is given to the psychology involved, as
well as to your own mental attitude.

“Little” Things Determine Sales Results
In selling it’s the little things that make the big difference in making or
missing the sale, just as the “little” things make the big difference in all
areas of life. Call a girl a kitten and she’ll love you. Call her a cat and
you’ve got a problem! Tell your wife she looks like the first day of spring
and you score all kinds of points. Tell her she looks like the last day of a
long, hard winter and you’re in big trouble!
There is a difference in results when you have those “little” things
working for you. Things like a good shine on your shoes; the well-pressed
suit, skirt, or dress; the neatness of your hair; the way your tie blends and is
tied; whether you are neat and clean-shaven; whether your makeup is fresh
and properly applied; whether you are overdressed or underdressed;
whether you’re smiling and courteous, on time, thoughtful, and considerate
of your prospect’s time; whether you are smoking or chewing gum; whether
you are organized and practice good human relations with follow-up
reminders and thank-you notes—and countless other “little” things that will
determine whether you miss or make the sale.
The list is endless, but in the final analysis, more often than not, one or
more of the little things communicate to your prospect that you do believe
in what you’re doing, that you are interested in serving him, and that you do
feel you’re offering the best product or service at the best price which will
do the most for him and his needs. When all of these things are going for
you, the question is not, “Will you succeed?” but rather, “When and how
big will that success be?”

When Should You Close?
Many times salespeople ask the question “When should you close?”
From the beginning I’ve heard salespeople and sales trainers say: “Close
early, close often, close late.” If you’ve been selling for three days, chances
are good you’ve also heard this phrase. In many cases that advice is sound,
but there is one glaring exception. You can close or attempt to close too

early and lose any real chance of making the sale later. Question: What or
when is “too early”? Answer: Too early is when you attempt to close before
you have established in the prospect’s mind significant value for what you
are selling.
Prospects, regardless of the product you sell, always buy the benefits your
product has for them. In short, when you convince the prospect that your
product scratches where he itches, he will buy. When you make him “itch”
for ownership, he will “scratch” around until he comes up with the money.
If you try to close before you establish value, you come across as a highpressure salesman who wants to make the sale and get on to the next
prospect without any real regard for what your present prospect’s needs and
desires might be. You will appear to be interested only in what you want
and this will build a wall between you and the prospect. You must climb
this wall before you make the sale, because the prospect sees you in that
“high-pressure” light. That’s a tough wall to climb, but if you don’t climb it,
your career sales register will frequently ring up “no sale.”
It is perfectly permissible to inform the prospect early in the interview
that you are going to ask for an order. Here’s a specific example: When I
was in the life insurance business we followed a two-appointment sales
process. The first appointment involved getting background information on
the prospect and exploring his projected future needs as far as retirement
and protection for his family were concerned (that’s qualifying the
prospect). When I went back for the second appointment (with the
proposal), I made the complete presentation, established value, and then
attempted to close the sale.

The “Fair Enough” Close
I started the second interview by taking out the rather elaborate proposal
along with a clean sheet of paper. I would hold the blank sheet of paper,
look at the prospect, and say, “Mr. Prospect, as you can plainly see, this is a
blank sheet of paper. Because there is nothing written on it, there is nothing
to understand or to misunderstand. I also have your proposal, which is quite
elaborate. This proposal was prepared exclusively for you, and frankly, it is
quite detailed. However, Mr. Prospect, I would like to make you a promise.

“I’m going to keep the explanation of the proposal just as simple and
clear as this blank sheet of paper. If I fail to do so, I will understand if you
are reluctant to make a decision concerning the proposal. For this reason, I
promise you that when I finish the explanation, the proposal will be just as
clear and just as simple as the blank sheet of paper. At that point, I am
going to ask you to make a decision. If you see that it is in your best
interests to say yes to the proposal, I’m going to ask you to say yes. If,
however, you think it is in your best interests to say no, then I am simply
going to ask you to say no. Is that fair enough, Mr. Prospect?”
An interesting thing happened on the way to the bank. My closing
percentage improved approximately 10 percent, but my volume of business
increased even more because I eliminated, or dramatically reduced, the
number of repeat calls, giving me more time to see new prospects.

4
Commonsense Selling
Prospects Won’t “Change” Their Minds. Think about this. When the
customer says no, the odds are at least a hundred to one you’re never going
to be able to get him to change his mind. Now I know what you’re thinking,
but I’ll say it again. When a prospect says no, the odds are at least a
hundred to one you’re not going to be able to get him to change his mind.
At this point you’re thinking, “Now, Ziglar, up until now I’ve felt you
were pretty much on target, but we’re going to part company on this one,
because most of the business I get comes after the prospect says, ‘No, no,
no, no.’ ” I don’t doubt for a moment that you are right.

The “New Decision” Close
I asked that Redhead of mine (she is a “decided” redhead, meaning that
one day she just decided to be a redhead!) to marry me and she said no. I
asked her the second time; she said no. Third time, no. Fourth time, no.
Fifth time, no. Sixth time, yes. No, she did not change her mind. What she
did was very simple. She made a new decision based on new information
which produced a new feeling.
Before you can get a prospect to change his mind, you’ve first got to get
him to admit he was wrong, that he made a mistake when he said no. Well,
friend, let me ask you a question. How many times in the last twelve
months have you admitted that you were wrong, that you made a mistake?
Another question: If it’s tough for you to admit you were wrong, how are
you going to get your prospect to admit he or she was wrong, that he made
a mistake? That will be even tougher, won’t it?

When a prospect says no, and you say in one form or another,
“Awwwww, go ahead, you know you’re going to buy it sooner or later—
sign here,” all you’re doing—in the prospect’s mind—is trying to highpressure him into saying he was wrong, that he was foolish to say no to
begin with. Getting a prospect to admit his “mistake” borders on the
impossible. All you’ll do is irritate or antagonize your prospect. That is not
the way to persuade him to buy from you.

No Often Means They Don’t Know
No, the prospect won’t change his mind, but he will be delighted to make
a new decision, based on new information. Example: “Why didn’t you tell
me the property was outside the city limits and I won’t have to pay city
taxes?” He’s in the process of making a new decision based on new
information. “Why didn’t you tell me we could print on both sides of the
paper? Even though it’s a little more expensive per sheet, it saves us money
because we double the usage.” He’s making a new decision based on new
information. “You should have explained that this model comes with ‘four
on the floor.’ My teenager would not want any other model.” He’s making
that new decision based on new information. Since prospects will make new
decisions based on new information, the sales process demands that you try
for the close as soon as you have established value or aroused desire for
ownership, but before you give all the information.
If you wait until you’ve given all the information before you try to close,
that would be an even more serious mistake. Some prospects automatically
say no on the first attempt to close so that they won’t feel they were
“easy”—and that they didn’t carefully investigate before they bought. More
importantly, they fear they will look foolish if they make a fast decision
which turns out to be wrong. Many times these prospects who initially say
no are actually saying, “Tell me more. Give me more information. Make me
feel secure that a yes decision is the right decision. In short, make it easier
for me to buy.” Your job as a salesperson is to do exactly that—make it
easier for the prospect to buy.

How Much You Pay

As a buyer, my reading friend, let me ask you a question. Would you give
a salesman one hundred dollars for a product or service that in your mind
you knew was worth no more than fifty dollars? Yes _____ No _____
Obviously, the answer is no, isn’t it? Second question: When you negotiate
with a prospect, do you honestly believe he will give you one hundred
dollars for something which he definitely feels is worth only fifty dollars?
Yes _____ No _____ Third question. Back to you: Suppose the salesman
uses ten of his best, most effective, most powerful sales closes on you.
Under those circumstances, would you give him one hundred dollars for a
product you positively felt was worth only fifty dollars? Yes _____ No
_____ I’ll bet the answer is still no. Actually, that’s a ridiculous question,
isn’t it?
Fourth question: Suppose the salesman got emotional about it, sent you
on a guilt trip, and insisted that you ought to buy to help him, his family, or
someone else? Then would you give him a hundred dollars for a product
which you knew was worth only fifty dollars? The answer is still no, isn’t
it?

Why the Prospect Says No
When a prospect says no, either he is saying that he does not have the
money—and all the sales expertise in the world will not generate that—or
he is saying, “I am not about to give you more for the product or service
than I feel the product or service is worth.”
The point is simple. When you use pressure on a prospect and persist in
your efforts to get him to buy, all you’re doing is antagonizing him or
turning the prospect off. When a prospect says no, chances are excellent
that in his mind he simply does not feel the product—for him—is worth the
price you’re asking.
Now in most cases you can’t significantly change or lower the price, but
you can dramatically change the value. But to change that value, you have
to give additional information about your goods or services. This generally
involves trust and good communication between the prospect and
salesperson. With this in mind, a truly professional and effective procedure
must include showing how you can raise the value of the product in the

mind of the prospect. That’s one of the purposes of Secrets of Closing the
Sale.

Closes Should Be Educational
Each close you use should be an educational process by which you
are able to raise the value of the product or service in the prospect’s
mind.
The minute the value equals the price, you have a prospect. Until the
value equals or exceeds the price, in the prospect’s mind you do not have a
legitimate prospect. All the technique, persuasion, and pressure are going to
be to no avail.
Once the value of the product or service, in the prospect’s mind, exceeds
the price, you have a “hot” prospect whom you still must close.
Please remember that you still have to deal with the fear factor in the
prospect’s mind—the fear he will be making a mistake if he goes ahead and
says yes, even though he can see that the value of your offer exceeds the
price you ask. This is the reason I constantly stress that the salesperson and
his personal integrity will be the determining factor in closing many, many
sales. What I’m really saying is that if you are the right kind of person,
selling the right product, using the right technique on the prospect with the
right motive, then your chances of selling your product or service are
dramatically increased.

Don’t Oversell
One real danger we encounter as salespeople is that sometimes in our
exuberance in the presentation, or in our frustration, we attempt close after
close with no results. The tendency to oversell on these occasions simply
overwhelms some of the weaker salespeople whose integrity is suspect or
whose interest is primarily in immediate profit rather than in building a
long-term sales career.
When you oversell you will invariably lose. The story of the Roman
Catholic girl who dated the Southern Baptist boy says it well. After about
the fourth date the girl returned home one evening in a highly motivated,

ecstatic, lovesick frame of mind. Her mother instantly saw that she was
“falling fast,” so she had a little talk with her.
Mom pointed out in no uncertain terms that the daughter should
terminate the relationship, that Catholics didn’t marry Baptists and Baptists
didn’t marry Catholics, so she should stop dating the boy. The girl tearfully
explained that she was in love with the boy and couldn’t Mom “do
something”?
Mom responded to the tears of her daughter and devised a plan. They
would “sell” the boy on taking instruction so he could become a good
Catholic, which would make the wedding acceptable and desirable.
Together Mom and daughter went to work on making that sale. Actually, it
was easy because the boy was already sold on the “product.” He started
taking instructions and the date was set, the church was reserved, the
invitations were sent out, and the gifts started coming in.
About a week before the wedding, the girl came home one night,
shedding those crocodile tears, instructing her mother between sobs to call
off the wedding, tell the priest, send back the gifts, cancel the church.
Finally, Mom got a word in and asked, “Well, daughter, what in the world
happened? I thought we had sold him on being a good Catholic.” To this the
girl tearfully responded, “That’s the problem, Mom. He’s going to be a
priest!” Lesson: Don’t oversell.

Overselling by Omission
Back in 1974 I completed one of my dreams, which was to have a really
nice office at home for my research and writing. Part of my dream included
a genuine leather sofa.
I had vivid memories of trips as a small boy in Yazoo City, Mississippi,
to Dr. C. L. Wallace’s dental office. In his outer office was an old, leather
sofa. I still recall sitting on that sofa, squeezing the armrest and getting
quite a charge out of the “squish.” There is nothing that “squishes” quite
like real leather, and I wanted that squish in my new office.
The Redhead and I went shopping at a major store in town with an
enormous inventory. The salesman pleasantly approached us, we conveyed
our wishes, and he led us to the sofa department. When we saw the first

leather sofa that appealed to me, I asked the price. He told me, and I was
pleasantly shocked because it was only about half as much as I had
anticipated. When I expressed my shock and delight that a genuine leather
sofa could be bought at that price, the salesman assured me that it was
indeed a remarkable buy and that was one of the reasons they sold so many
of them.
I sat down on the sofa and leaned back. It felt really good. I squeezed the
armrest and the “squish” was there. I stood up and walked around the sofa,
admiring it. It was truly beautiful and again I expressed my delight in
finding a leather sofa at such a bargain price. Once again the salesman
commented that yes, it was a real bargain and a big seller for them. At this
point I told the salesman I would take it.
Next I told the salesman we needed a nice coffee table to set in front of
the sofa, so we headed for the coffee table department. On the way we
passed another leather sofa, very similar to the one I had just agreed to buy.
If anything, I liked this one slightly better, so I walked over, looked it over
carefully, sat down, leaned back, and was a little undecided as to which one
I truly liked the best. So I asked the price. The salesman told me and again I
was shocked, because this one was nearly twice the price of the one I had
just ordered. I asked the obvious question: “Why does this one cost almost
twice as much?” He explained it in one simple sentence: “This one is all
leather.”
Zig: “Well, friend, what is that one I just ordered made of? I was under
the impression it was all leather.” Salesman: “It is all leather—where the
human body comes in contact with the sofa. The tops of the cushions, the
armrests, and the part you lean back against are all genuine leather.
However, underneath the armrest, underneath the sofa, and the entire back
of the sofa are naugahyde.” He quickly assured me, however, that no one
would ever know the difference, pointing out that even I had not detected
the difference. He also assured me that the naugahyde would last just as
long as the leather and look just as good.
Zig: “Friend, why didn’t you tell me to begin with that the one I ordered
is not all leather?” Salesman: “I intended to, but somehow the conversation
always changed—but I was going to tell you before you left, because I’m
not the kind of salesman who would mislead anyone.”

Question to you, dear reader: Which one of the sofas do you think I
bought, or do you figure I walked out without buying anything? If you
figured I walked out without buying anything, you hit the nail on the head.
Not only did I not buy anything that day but I have never been back in the
store.
You might reasonably ask: If he had told me the full story to begin with,
would I have bought the sofa? The answer is no, I would not have bought
the one which was part naugahyde. All my life I wanted a real leather sofa,
and I had just completed a beautiful office exactly like I wanted. Under no
circumstances would I have compromised on that sofa. Would I have
bought the more expensive leather one? Probably not on the first visit,
because it was quite expensive. However, I would have shopped around
and, based on what I found in the marketplace, I probably would have
bought the more expensive one. At any rate, I can assure you I would have
been back in the store long before now looking for other items.
The point is a very simple one: By omission, the salesman lied to me. It
was abundantly clear that I thought the first sofa was all leather. When he
did not set the record straight, he misled me. When I saw the real leather
sofa and expressed interest in it, perhaps he visualized doubling his sale, but
greed or dishonesty cost him a substantial immediate sale and eliminated
any chance for future sales.
It’s a trite statement, but it’s more true than trite that honesty is not just
the best policy—it’s the only policy for those salespeople who expect to
build a solid sales career.
Lesson: Don’t lie or mislead by omission.

Closing Is Not Natural
Of all the skills we acquire, perhaps none is less natural than the skill of
the closer. This is especially true for those of us who are part of another
generation, and to a degree this is still true today. Almost from birth we
have been told not to ask for everything we see or want. As children we
were told that asking wasn’t nice and indicated concern only for self. We
were conditioned to wait until things were offered.

However, when we entered the world of selling, we were repeatedly told
to ask for the order, to encourage the prospect to buy. Since the salesperson
obviously benefits from the sale, it appeared to be a selfish move on our
part. That’s one reason I included the persuasion analogy, using Aristotle
and Galileo as an example. This example, along with countless others,
makes the point that you are being selfish, or at least unconcerned, when
you don’t ask for the order, because, as previously stated, the customer is
the biggest winner in an ethical sales transaction.
Again, closing is a learned skill and not a natural one. Fortunately, once
your thinking is sound and clear on the matter, a high degree of skill can be
acquired, provided you’re willing to make the effort.

Miss the Sale and You Both Lose
Actually, salespeople are problem solvers. If you’ve got the solution to
the prospect’s problem and he doesn’t buy from you, then he, far more than
you, is the loser. Once you’ve accepted that fact and understand that selling
is an educational process for the buyer and closing represents graduate
school for you, your career will move into high gear. Your personal benefits
will be greater because your customers are benefiting greatly.
As a salesperson you need to understand that every close you learn and
use should give the prospect a reason to buy, an excuse for buying, or
information so that he can act intelligently in his own best interests. Once
you understand and accept this premise, it helps you to move closing from
being selfish on your part to being helpful to the prospect.
This important—even critical—adjustment in your thinking will enable
you to start closing more of the close ones. This is important in your career
because a high percentage of sales hinges on a series of minor things. Your
attitude toward that customer is not minor, and I can assure you it will make
a great deal of difference in the bottom line of your financial statement at
the end of the month. If you do not have that ability to transfer your feelings
of belief and conviction to the prospect, you are not going to close those
close ones, which means you will not reach your full potential.
As my late good friend, sales training and motivational expert Cavett
Robert, said:

“The prospect is persuaded more by the depth of your conviction
than he is by the height of your logic.”
Some Commonsense Psychology from a Psychiatrist
My psychiatrist friend, the late John Kozek of Dunedin, Florida, designed
his beautiful home and was the architect and contractor. He was up in the
cathedral ceiling working and was covered with dust and perspiration and
talking to the crew in Greek. In walked a factory representative of a
window company. As the man stood on the floor far below, John called a
greeting to him in English. “He ignored me, thinking I was ‘only a laborer,’
” he said. The salesman went over to Maria (Mrs. Kozek) and started to tell
her about stained-glass windows, but she told him he would have to talk to
her husband. The representative said he would be glad to. She responded
that he’d already missed his chance, and the salesman looked puzzled. Then
Maria pointed up at the scaffold where John was working.
John suggested that I warn all salespeople to “be nice to everyone,
because you don’t always know who you’re talking to.” That’s good advice
from Dr. Kozek.

Cindy Took the Advice
While making a cosmetics sale in Sakowitz Department Store, Cindy
Oates (who just happens to be my daughter) noticed a customer waiting to
be served. Normally when a customer shows up at the cosmetics counter,
the salesladies immediately converge on him, but this man wasn’t the
standard Sakowitz customer. He was wearing run-down loafers and the
holes in his socks extended well up over his heels. His hair was greasy and
his clothes were dirty and literally hung on his bony frame. All in all he
looked (to the idle clerks standing nearby) like he didn’t “belong” at the
cosmetics counter of a ritzy department store—especially at the Erno
Laszlo cosmetics counter—so he was ignored. (Somebody forgot that you
shouldn’t judge a book by its cover!)
Two things prompted Cindy to quickly and courteously move over to the
prospect. Number one, she is a gracious lady (that’s an unbiased fact) who
is truly a professional salesperson committed to giving everyone who

approaches the counter a chance to get what he wants and needs. Number
two, she noticed that the man had a piece of paper in his hand. To her that
meant he was a husband with a list of things he was going to buy for his
wife. She was right on the button. The list was short—just three items—but
the sale was nearly a hundred dollars, the equivalent of nearly three hundred
dollars today. The purchase was completed in a matter of minutes and the
man was extremely nice, with beautiful manners.
That book’s cover (the man’s appearance) wasn’t very good, but his
pocketbook was in excellent shape. Later on in this book I talk a lot about
the “Assumptive” Close or attitude. For the moment I urge you to assume
that everyone you approach is a good prospect with a real problem (need)
which you can solve. Be nice to them. All of them. You’ve got nothing to
lose and a lot to gain.

Selling Is like Playing Golf
To be most effective in a sales presentation, you should lead off with
your very best shot, your Sunday punch, the one you feel has the most
persuasiveness and the most power. Save your second-best shot for the final
effort. Generally speaking, your prospect hears the beginning and the
ending but often does not hear what’s in the middle. This procedure helps
ensure that your prospect is going to remember the two most powerful parts
of your presentation. So if you’ve got to choose what he hears, you
certainly want to choose the most persuasive information you have.
Underneath all of this is the fact that your prospect is not going to buy
cold, hard facts. He is going to buy warm people benefits. You also want to
remember that selling is like playing golf. In golf, if you’re going to score
well and win, you must make every shot so you will be in position to make
the next one. However, you must remember that if you don’t make this shot
(sale) it doesn’t make much difference what position you’re in, because you
might not have a chance to make the next one.
If you miss too many sales, you’re going to be broke and out of business,
so first things first. Concentrate on making this sale, but concentrate on
making it in such a way that you’ll be in position to make the next one.
That’s career-building selling.

5
Voice Training to Close Sales
Using Cassette Recorders. Beyond any reasonable doubt, if you’re going to
build your sales career to the fullest, you’ve got to do something that 95
percent of all salespeople never do. They never deliberately train
themselves on how to use their voices more effectively. They don’t do any
work toward developing voice inflection and voice modulation, so this
entire chapter is devoted to selling you on the importance of properly
utilizing your voice and offering specific suggestions as to how you can
train your voice to improve your sales effectiveness.
In order to develop your voice, let’s consider the cassette player and why
you must use it as a cassette recorder.
Many people get marvelous usage out of this instrument by listening to
what other people have to say. But, salespeople, here’s good news for you!
You’ve got something to say as well! You need to—no, you must— start
utilizing a cassette recorder for the training and development of your voice
and sales procedures so you can say what you say even more effectively.
You should record not only your presentation but also the way you handle
objections and close the sale. Then you should listen several times to what
you have said and the way you said it.
You’re going to be amazed to discover that, your effectiveness
notwithstanding, much of what you say is superfluous (you talk too much)
and you often speak in a monotone. If it is possible to record your sales call
in front of a “live” prospect, I encourage you to do so. If this is not possible,
you should definitely record your presentation (role-playing with someone
else) in a training-room environment. In either event, you will be shocked at
the nonanswers you give to questions and objections, and the number of

times you heard what the prospect said but missed what he was saying. You
can correct most of this by utilizing your cassette player/recorder.
Would You Buy from You? Record your presentation, listen to it, and
then ask yourself: “If I were calling on me and made that presentation,
would I be able to persuade me to take action on the offer?” Many times
when I talk to people about recording their presentation, they say, “Yeah,
but, Zig, I don’t sound that way. That person on that recorder, that’s not
me!” Well, friend, I’ve got news for you—it is you! Admittedly, there will
be some distortion, especially if you use an inexpensive recorder with a
poor microphone, but the distortion is not nearly as much as you think.
The reason for the apparent distortion is simple. To begin with, when you
talk and listen to the sound of your own voice, the primary source of sound
is coming through vibrations of the bone. When you make a recording and
listen to it, the sound comes into your eardrums through the air. So record
your presentation with the confidence that the way you sound to you is the
way you sound to your prospects. In order to develop the most effective
methods of dealing with your prospects, you must know how you sound to
your prospects. Recording your presentation enables you to do exactly that.

Voice Inflection Changes Meaning
To demonstrate what you can do with your voice, I’m going to take one
sentence which has eight words in it and make those eight words mean
eight different things. (I’ll admit, this is clearer and more dramatic in a
cassette recording.) Take the sentence (1) “I did not say he stole the
money.” That’s a simple, factual statement. (2) “I did not say he stole the
money” implies that it was said, but by someone else. (3) “I DID NOT say
he stole the money” is a vigorous denial that you said it. (4) “I did not SAY
he stole the money” hints that you might have implied it, but you didn’t say
it. (5) “I did not say HE stole the money” implies that someone other than
the accused stole the money.
You could also make it say, (6) “I did not say he STOLE the money.”
Here you hint that the accused might have “borrowed” the money but didn’t
actually steal it. (7) “I did not say he stole THE money” implies that he
might have stolen some money but not THE money. (8) “I did not say he
stole the MONEY ” suggests that he might have stolen something, but

certainly not the money. They are the same words, but with an educated
change in your voice inflection, you can make those eight words say eight
different things.

The “Voice Inflection” Close
The exciting thing is the fact that voice inflection is a skill you can learn.
It’s not as easy as it might appear, but in just fifteen minutes a day for ten
days you will have mastered the fundamentals. In my judgment, voice
inflection is the most important single undeveloped skill you need to
concentrate on in your pursuit of professional sales excellence.
You start to learn voice inflection by taking your cassette recorder and
practicing that one sentence. Once you have recorded it the first time, listen
and see if you accomplished your objective. If not, try it again and again
until you have recorded it exactly as you want. Go through the entire
sequence until you can make those eight words say eight different things.
Don’t be disappointed or discouraged if it takes you two, three, four, or a
dozen times to get it right.
Once you are satisfied that it is right, give it the acid test. Record the
eight words with the voice inflection covering the eight different areas. Let
your mate or an associate listen and see if they can pick out what you are
communicating. Keep practicing until someone else understands clearly
what you are saying. Now the groundwork is solidly laid for you to rerecord your sales presentation and procedures. Be certain to save the first
recording, because you will see a definite improvement in the recording—
and more importantly, in the sales results.
I will return to voice inflection several times, and later I’ll tell you about
a cassette recording which is a must for your sales library. I hope and
believe that by the time we are finished, the proper use of your voice will be
one of the skills you will be committed to acquire.
Remember—you bought this book to become more professional, so if
you’re serious, you will follow the suggestions we are making. You are not
trying something. You are using something that has been tried and proven
by thousands of people who have learned the technique in seminars or by
using our recordings on the subject.

Final thought. Using voice inflection and change of pace helps to hold
your prospect’s attention. That’s important, because if he isn’t listening, he
won’t get the message and the information necessary to make the yes
decision. Under these circumstances, he will be compelled to say no and
both of you will lose.

Dealing with the Price Objection
Now let’s cover one major objection that can be more effectively handled
by properly using your voice. This objection is encountered by virtually
every salesperson many times during the course of his sales career. All of us
encounter, on a regular basis, the prospect who suggests directly or
indirectly that the price is a little out of line or that the product is
ridiculously and unreasonably overpriced.
One prospect might belligerently and dogmatically say, “THAT PRICE
IS RIDICULOUS!” Another prospect might gently, even smilingly, say,
“Well, it seems to me that the price is a little [pause] out of line.” I’ve even
had folks put it in exquisite colloquial terms: “You folks kinda proud of that
stuff you sell, ain’t cha?”

You Justify or He Defends
To the one who is dogmatic and says, “THAT PRICE IS
RIDICULOUS!” you repeat, almost verbatim, what he said: “The price
[pause] is ridiculous?” (Your voice inflection should make it sound like a
question.) Inflection is important because in this example you are, as one of
my mentors, the late Charlie Cullen, would have said, “audaciously”
challenging the prospect. You’re creating a situation that forces him to
defend his statement instead of you justifying the price. There’s quite a
difference. One puts you on the defense and the other puts you on the
offense. The difference in results is substantial.
It’s simple but not easy. I challenge you to get your cassette recorder, use
the same words, and carefully listen to what you’ve said. Chances are
excellent you’re going to have to repeat the process a dozen, maybe even
twenty, times to get your voice inflection just right. Trouble? Yes. Work?
Yes. Worth it? You betcha!

Suppose the prospect says, “It seems to me the price is a little out of
line.” The first thing you’ve got to determine is whether the price really is
the problem or there is another issue. You make that determination by
asking questions. Sales trainer John Hammond has successfully handled
thousands of objections by asking: “If there were a way I could show you
that the price is more than fair and the product is worth every dime we’re
asking, would you go ahead and take advantage of our offer today?”
This forces the prospect to make a commitment based on price when his
real objection is color, size, style, neighborhood, or something else you
could and should identify. If this is the situation, his response is going to be,
“Well, no, not really.” Then the salesman can say, “Then there must be
some other reason you are hesitating. Would you mind if I ask what the
reason is?” This is a superb procedure for smoking out the real objection.
If price is the objection, you continue in this way. You: “Let me ask you,
Mr. Prospect, do you like the product?” Many times he’ll respond, “Yes, I
like the product, but it seems to me that the price is . . . a little out of line.”
You (softly and gently): “Mr. Prospect, wouldn’t you agree that it’s difficult
to pay too much for something you really like?” (Now the ball is back in his
court.)
Many times, if it’s a relatively inexpensive item, your prospect might go
ahead and invest, since that question, which forces him to think, could also
lead him to make a yes decision. In most cases, if it’s a high-ticket item, he
will probably think for a moment and say, “Well, I do like it. But yes, I
think you can pay too much regardless of how much you might like it. I
know I wouldn’t give you seventy thousand dollars for a Cadillac, even
though I might really enjoy having one.”

The “Fear of Loss” Close
Now you’re dealing with something which is very basic, so let me repeat.
The fear of loss is greater than the desire for gain. You need to establish in
that prospect’s mind the fact that he’s safe in dealing with you, that he
won’t lose (either money or “face”) by buying from you, but that he will
lose (product benefits) if he doesn’t buy from you.
One effective way to do this is to say to the prospect, “Mr. Prospect,
you’re going to be concerned about price one time. That’s the day you buy.

You’re going to be concerned with quality for the life of the product itself.
With this in mind, let me urge you to think along these lines: Wouldn’t you
agree that it’s better to invest a little more than you expected than a little
less than you should? (Wait for answer.) The reason is simple. If you invest
a little more than expected, we are talking about pennies. If you invest less
than you should and the product won’t do the job which you expected it to
do, then you will lose all you have invested.”
John Ruskin made an astute observation concerning price: “It is unwise
to pay too little. When you pay too much, you lose a little money, that is all.
When you pay too little, you sometimes lose everything because the thing
you bought was incapable of doing what it was bought to do. The common
law of business balance prohibits paying a little and getting a lot . . . it can’t
be done. If you deal with the lowest bidder, it is well to add something for
the risk you run, and if you do that then you will have enough to pay for
something better.” That makes sense, doesn’t it?
Wait—They’re Not Worthless—Yet. Let’s look at an example that
cements this point. If you are a woman or have a wife, sister, or mother, you
will relate to this. Question: Do you know anyone who has some unused
cosmetics at home in a drawer? Yes _____ No _____ (Betcha you said yes!)
Chances are excellent the cosmetics are in perfectly good condition—and
nothing is really wrong with them—but they’ve been in the drawer for
several months. They are not being used and they are not going to be used,
but these cosmetics are not dried out quite enough yet to throw away. So
what happens? The owner decides to keep them another six months and at
that point, since the cosmetics will be totally worthless to anybody, the
owner can economically justify throwing them away.
Question: Wouldn’t it have been better to have invested a little more than
you expected instead of less than you should have to get exactly what you
wanted and needed? The extra investment would have been measured in
pennies. As it is, you’ve lost every penny you invested in the cosmetics. If
you count satisfaction and personal pride (and you ladies know how much
better you feel when you’re all dolled up!), then you really are getting a
bargain when you invest in quality, aren’t you?

This Is a Bargain?

I believe it would be safe to say that all of us (and that certainly includes
yours truly) have been guilty of buying “bargains” in the past. You saw the
big sale advertisement on ladies’ shoes. There they were—Bruno Magli
$250 shoes, special, one-time-only, closeout, inventory reduction,
supergigantic, colossal. Never before in the history of woman has such a
bargain been offered!
It’s obviously more than a woman can resist. Down you go to the store,
slip on those magnificent Bruno Magli shoes, and while it is true that you
wear a 6-1/2B and these are 6AA’s, you begin to rationalize. They will
stretch as you wear them, and though they are most uncomfortable as you
struggle to take those five or six convincing steps in the store, and even
though you know they really are too tight, the lure of getting such a bargain,
saving over one hundred dollars, just overwhelms you. Besides, they are
exactly the right color to go with your new dress and purse. (Logically you
know you should not buy the wrong size, but emotionally the lure of such a
“bargain” overwhelms you.)
The sale is made. You pay $119.95, and you walk out with a $250 pair of
shoes—carrying them, of course. Since they are so beautiful you save them
for church on Sunday. As you slip them on and your feet start to scream,
your better judgment tells you not to wear them, but you determine to tough
it out because, after all, they’re so beautiful and such a bargain.
So you do tough it out and you do survive the sermon, though you can’t
remember a word the preacher said. That’s the one and only time you wear
those shoes. Almost $120 to wear them one time is a pretty steep price.
Question: Wouldn’t it have been better to have paid the regular price and
gotten your size and worn them for months to come?

Me, Too
As the old saying goes, I know how you feel because I’ve done exactly
the same thing. The suit was regularly priced (several years ago) at $279.95,
marked down to just $149.95. Though at the time I wore a 44 Regular and
this was a 42 Regular, I felt confident I was “going to lose the weight,” and
in the meantime I could suffer a little for such a beautiful suit. You can
finish the story, can’t you? That’s right. I wore it one time and the moths got
to the suit before I lost the weight.

Yep. It would have been better had I invested a little more than expected
instead of a little less than I did. On the former a few dollars would have
been invested; on the latter I lost the entire purchase price (one wearing cost
me $149.95 plus tax!).
The same line of thinking can be applied when you persuade your
prospects to have their teeth crowned or buy a nicer suit, a better dress, a
more powerful truck, a better-built lawn mower, or whatever you are
selling. Just remember that when you are attempting to move that prospect
into a better product, it must be in the prospect’s best interests. Otherwise
you both will end up losing.
As the late Dick Gardner often said, “Why settle for the ‘get by’ when in
the long run the good costs less?”

The “Cost” Close
Here’s a question you ask when your prospect talks about price: “Mr.
Prospect, if you could convince yourself [don’t ever say, ‘If I could
convince you,’ because he’s not interested in you convincing him of
anything] that the price is more than fair, would you be willing to go ahead
with a yes decision today?”
If that question gets a yes answer, then you ask the next question, which
is a very significant one. You eyeball the prospect and say, “Mr. Prospect,
since you are obviously concerned about price, let me make certain we’re
communicating. Are you really that interested in price, or is it cost you’re
concerned with?” The odds are great that your prospect is going to respond
with, “What do you mean, am I talking about price or cost? What is the
difference?”

Seeing Is Believing
You: “Well, Mr. Prospect, let me explain it this way.” (Now get your
“talking pad”4 ready for use. Prospects are inclined to believe what they
see. If you write it down, not only are they more likely to believe it, but
chances are great they will understand it better as well.) When I talk about
price and cost, here’s the example I use. (You should get your own example,
one that’s appropriate and fits your situation.)

“Mr. Prospect, back in 1971 my six-year-old son and I went out to buy a
bicycle. We went to the Schwinn Bicycle Shop and were shocked at the
$64.95 price tag. Certainly no prudent parent in 1971, when $64.95
represented a lot of money, could justify spending that much money on a
bicycle for a six-year-old boy.
“We headed for the discount store. ‘After all,’ I reasoned, ‘he’s just going
to tear it up learning how to ride, and a cheaper bicycle will be good enough
for that.’ We invested $34.95 in a bicycle. Much better— price-wise.
“About six weeks later we went back to get a new pair of handlebars. The
cost normally would have been $4.50, but the bike was still in warranty so
it didn’t cost us anything. Sixty days later, when we went back for more
handlebars, the bicycle was no longer in warranty, so we had to invest the
$4.50. About six weeks later we were back in the bicycle shop because the
entire sprocket arrangement had completely collapsed. I’ve forgotten the
exact cost, but it came to $15 and change. A few weeks later we were back
in the shop because the wheel bearings were shot, and they wanted another
$5 or $6. At that point I decided there was no way out, so I threw in the
towel. Then we bought the Schwinn bicycle at $64.95.

“Cheap” Costs More
“Now let’s look at the difference between price and cost. The price of the
‘economy’ bicycle was $34.95. The price of the Schwinn bicycle was
$64.95. Now let’s look at cost. The cost of the economy bicycle was $34.95
plus $4.50 plus $15 for a total of $54.45. My son rode that bicycle for six
months—not counting the down time.
“The cost of the Schwinn bicycle was $64.95 and he rode it for ten years.
It ‘cost’ us $9 a month for my son to ride the ‘economy’ bicycle. It ‘cost’ us
$6.50 a year for him to ride the Schwinn—and it was still a good bicycle
when we passed it on to a smaller child. The only money we had to spend
on it was for a couple of tires, and that had nothing to do with the durability
or the quality of the bicycle.”
Note: As you talk you diagram it on your talking pad. This one looks like
this:

“Now, Mr. Prospect, let me point this out. The price of the economy
bicycle was considerably less ($34.95 vs. $64.95), but the cost difference
was even more ($9 a month vs. $6.50 a year). So, Mr. Prospect, may I ask
you again, is it price you’re concerned with, or is it cost? Price is a one-time
thing; cost is something you are going to be concerned about for as long as
you’ve got the product. [If this next sentence is true, you can and should
close with it.] Some companies can beat us on price, but, Mr. Prospect,
when it comes to cost, we win that battle. Since you are obviously costconscious, doesn’t it make good sense to immediately start enjoying the
lowest possible cost?”
P.S. It goes without saying that you will use an example involving your
own product to make this point.

Does This Technique Work?
Bill Egan, a Buick-Datsun dealer in Bradley, Illinois, said yes.
After returning from a business meeting, Bill was told by his
management team that an elderly couple was in a closing office and had
been for some time. This was their third trip into the dealership, so they
were definitely interested in buying, but they were still hesitating and the
salesman was making no progress. Two other salespeople had also tried for
the close with no results. Bill had been listening on his cassette recorder to

this particular close on price and cost, so he decided to give it a try himself.
The following dialogue took place after the introduction and small talk.
Bill: “It will take $9,600 for the exchange.” Couple: “The price is too
high.” (In this particular case the woman was the one who made the
statement.) Bill (lowering his voice and adding inflection so the statement
became a question): “Ma’am, the price is too high?” Lady: “Yes, the price is
too high.” Bill: “Let me ask you, ma’am, are you talking about price or
cost?” Husband and wife both looked at Bill with blank stares. Lady: “What
do you mean?” (At this point Bill says he knew he had at least made some
progress.)
Bill: “Ma’am, do you mind if I tell you a story to emphasize the point?”
Lady: “No. Go right ahead.” Bill: “Several months ago, I contracted for a
large amount of asphalt to be put down on my property. While making the
preliminary investigation, just as you are doing now, I wanted to make
certain I got the best buy for my money. I believe all of us want that,
wouldn’t you agree?” (The lady agreed.) Bill continued: “I don’t know
much about asphalt, blacktop, and construction, but I had learned that the
number of inches of gravel you put underneath as a base determines how
much the price is going to be. Like a lot of other people, I went with the
best price.
“To make a long story short, it wasn’t two months before I started
noticing cracks and upheavals in the surface of the asphalt. Walking around
the property I discovered it was happening everywhere. In about a year the
asphalt was breaking up and I spent an additional six thousand dollars
repairing the job I had originally paid for. Here’s my point, ma’am. Price is
a one-time thing. Cost can go on forever and ever, as long as you have the
particular product. Question: Wouldn’t it be better to pay a fair price one
time and be through with it than to go on paying those little costs you get
from a product which is probably not as good as what you’re looking at
right now?”
At this point Bill paused. The husband looked at her as she looked at
him. Without further ado she said, “I’ll take it.” Bill continues by saying
that not only did he close the sale but it was for a product that was several
hundred dollars more than she was going to pay for another car somewhere

else. The only thing Bill had done was convince her of the difference
between price and cost.
Several factors are involved in this sale. Number one, the couple
obviously wanted this particular car, or they would not have made the third
trip into the dealership. Number two, Bill used voice inflection, a solid
business reputation, and a talking pad in the transaction. Number three, he
used a simple analogy to make his point and hold the prospect’s interest.
Number four, he asked a question which led the prospects to come to their
own conclusion. Another story with a happy ending because the right man
was using the right techniques, selling the right product under the right
circumstances to people who were legitimate prospects.
The next point is very simple. Wouldn’t it have been doubly unfortunate
for everyone concerned had this couple, who obviously wanted the car, and
Bill Egan, who obviously wanted the sale, been unable to get together
because of the absence of sales skills and persuasion?

The Price Is Too High
Later on in Secrets, I deal at length with the statement that no salesman is
“normal” if he is really outstanding. I now extend that to include the buyers,
because they are not “normal” either at the time they get ready to sign the
agreement. There is demonstrable proof that when a person signs an order
for a significant amount of money, in almost every case there is a
measurable increase in his pulse rate. A change is taking place and he’s
going through a process that affects him emotionally. When we become
completely aware of the extent of the effect, we will be able to deal more
empathetically with the prospect and consequently be more effective as
salespeople.
In dealing with a price objection, you must remember that many people
will automatically say the price is too high, whether they feel that way or
not. This is a method many people use because they think that by using it
they’ll be able to negotiate a better price.
Here is yet another approach to handling the “price is too high”
objection: “I’m glad you’re concerned about price, Mr. Prospect, because
that’s one of our most attractive advantages. Would you agree that, as a
practical matter, a product is worth what it can do for you and not what you

have to pay for it?” (Wait for answer.) “Starting with that premise, let’s take
a look at what our product will do for you.”
Objection: The price is too high. You: “Mr. Prospect, our company had to
make a choice between building our product as cheaply as possible and
selling it as a get-by product, or building quality into the product for
service, durability, and your long-lasting enjoyment. In short, for long-range
value and benefit. With this decision facing us, we tried to put ourselves in
your shoes. We felt you would prefer to deal with a company that puts
everything possible into its product to make it the best and most useful,
rather than a company that uses cheap materials and cheap labor to turn out
a get-by product. Most people, Mr. Prospect, and I’ll bet that includes you,
clearly understand that good things are not cheap and cheap things are
seldom good. You do want something you can depend on for good service
over the long haul, don’t you, Mr. Prospect?”

Prospect Forgets Price—but Remembers Quality
As we explore cost and offer suggestions and instructions on the most
effective way to use your voice and deal with price in this chapter, it’s
almost like killing a fly with a sledgehammer, since we give you so many
details on this one point. However, it is important and will become even
more important in the future, so the objective is to cover all the bases.
From your perspective, I think it’s important to remember that the
customer is likely to forget the price—especially if he likes the product.
Example: You probably have several suits or dresses which you really enjoy
wearing. Chances are good that if you’ve had them very long you have
forgotten the exact price of those suits or dresses.
People forget price but they’ll never forget poor quality or a poor choice.
They generally give the salesperson a generous portion of the blame. Some
of that goes with the territory, but too much blame means you won’t have
the territory for long.

The “Quality” Close
In selling low-ticket items (brushes, soap, cosmetics), your time
investment would be too great to cover all the foregoing information on
dealing with price, so let’s look at a power-packed quick response which is

enormously effective. You can also use this one to convince the hesitant
buyer who says the price is too high in an over-the-counter transaction in a
retail outlet.
Lower your voice, look your prospect in the eye, and say, “You know,
Mr. Prospect, many years ago our company made a basic decision. We
decided that it would be easier to explain price one time than it would be to
apologize for quality forever. [Slight pause.] And I’ll bet you’re glad we
made that decision, aren’t you?”
If you are selling that low-ticket item, this last one might be the only one
you will use. In situations involving considerable sums of money, it can be
the icing on the cake that moves the prospect into the buyer’s chair.
State Farm agent Ab Jackson from Tucson, Arizona, was dealing with a
prospect and making no progress. As a matter of fact, Ab was in somewhat
of a sales slump and this prospect was mildly antagonistic. After Ab had
made his presentation and handled several questions, the prospect was fairly
emphatic in his statement that the price was too high.
Just as he has learned from the recording which covers this close, Ab
looked at the prospect, lowered his voice, and said, “Mr. Prospect, at State
Farm we decided many years ago that it would be easier to explain price
one time than to apologize for poor quality or poor service forever—[pause]
and I’ll bet you are glad we made that decision, aren’t you?” The prospect
said nothing for a few seconds, then firmly said, “I’ll take it.” The sale was
almost exactly twice as big as the biggest contract Ab had ever written.
I urge you to do what Ab Jackson did. Practice, drill, and rehearse until
the words and the right voice inflection become a part of you. Do this and
you will have developed a powerful tool for persuading your prospect to
take the action which will benefit you and him.

The “Answer for Everything” Close
Chances are excellent, especially if you are in direct sales, that you have
been in a selling situation in which you’ve answered one objection after
another. Regardless of what has come up you’ve handled it effectively.
Finally, the prospect (in a husband/wife situation) turns to his wife and says,
“Oh, Martha, it doesn’t make any difference what you say; he’s got an

answer for everything!” Or, in a more sophisticated environment, he might
say to you, “Well, you’ve certainly done your homework. It doesn’t make
any difference what I ask; you’ve got an answer for it!”

Feed Your Ego—or Make the Sale
If that ever happens (I should say, when that happens), you’re faced with
a major decision. You can either decide to feed your ego or decide to make
the sale. You can’t do both. When he says, “You’ve got an answer for
everything,” you can either grin and say, “Well, as a matter of fact, last
month I was number one in the office, and the month before . . .”—or you
can take a different approach and make the sale.
If you give the preceding response, you’ve just fed your ego and that’s all
you’ll feed. When your prospect makes the statement “You’ve got an
answer for everything,” if you want to further your career, you need to
lower your voice, look him in the eye, and slowly, softly say, “Mr. Prospect,
I really appreciate that comment and I’m going to take it as a compliment.
But actually I don’t have an answer for many of the questions and
objections people bring to me. That’s the reason I’m excited about selling
the product which is the answer to your problem. And that’s what you really
want, isn’t it [nodding your head as you talk]?”
That procedure, my selling friend, is stronger than dirt! It will get results,
if you are sincere and believe what you are saying!
Let’s elaborate on that last sentence by saying you can take the biggest
crook in town and teach him the words, procedures, and techniques that
professional salespeople all over the world successfully use. However, the
effectiveness of those words and techniques would be seriously limited by
the credibility of the person using them. It is true—the most important part
of the sales process is the salesperson.
The study by DeMarco and Maginn of The Forum Corporation of
Boston, Massachusetts (page 118), contains much valuable information and
supports this credibility contention completely. As a matter of fact, this one
factor consistently appeared throughout the report. High performers in the
world of selling establish trust with customers by one-on-one, eye-to-eye
communication skills. They maintain trust by personally assuming
responsibility for completing the sale, which means servicing the account

on an ongoing basis and utilizing their company support people in the most
effective manner. High performers demonstrated great integrity with their
follow-through and belief that the sale is not complete until the product is
installed and functioning, and the customer is satisfied.

6
The Professional Sells and Delivers
My First “Sale.” When I’d been in the sales world about three months, in
1947, I used psychology in what I consider my first real sales strategy.
Many things were still fairly difficult to get, including good heavy-duty
waterless cookware. We were taking as many orders as we could get, but
delivery was sometimes delayed for one to three months. World War II had
not been over very long, and for about four years no heavy-duty cookware
had been available. So there was a backlog of demand. Experienced
salesmen were having a field day, but I was a novice and, frankly, I was
struggling.
One day I was in Winnsboro, South Carolina, knocking on doors,
attempting to sell. I knocked on the door of Mr. Anderson, a highway
patrolman whose wife came to the door. She let me in, explaining that her
husband and Mr. Boulware from next door were out in the backyard, but
that she and Mrs. Boulware would be glad to look at the cookware. Once I
got inside, I persuaded the ladies to invite their husbands in, assuring them
that they, too, would enjoy the demonstration. The ladies “coerced” their
husbands into coming in.
No amount of persuasion, however, could convince the men to take the
demonstration seriously. I put on an enthusiastic cooking presentation,
cooking apples without water and on low heat in my set of cookware and
some by the old-fashioned way with water in the cookware they had. The
difference was dramatic, and as I set the apples cooked by two different
methods in front of them, both couples were by now impressed with the
difference. The men, however, apparently feared they were about to be sold
something, so they acted as if they had no interest.

The “Reverse” Close
At that point, I knew the sale was lost, so I decided to use a little reverse
selling. I cleaned my cookware, packed it back in the sample case, and said
to the couples, “Well, I really appreciate your letting me demonstrate. I only
wish I could offer you the cookware today. Perhaps it will be available in
the future.”
Immediately both husbands became vitally interested in our set of
cookware. Mr. Anderson and Mr. Boulware both came out of their seats and
demanded to know when it would be available. I assured them I did not
know exactly, but I would keep them in mind when it was. They persisted,
“Well, suppose you forget us, how will we know?” I responded, “Well, I
suppose—to be on the safe side—it would be all right for you to go ahead
and make a deposit on a set which the company would ship when it’s
available. It might be a month or it could even be three months.” Both of
them eagerly reached into their pockets and came up with the down
payment. About six weeks later the merchandise was shipped. (It’s
important to note that throughout the presentation I dealt strictly with the
facts.)
There is something about human nature that seems to want whatever is
unavailable or difficult to obtain. In this case, I was simply using a little
sales psychology to capitalize on this facet of human nature.
Two important points: Number one, reverse selling is a very effective
method of persuasion, but number two, you must be scrupulously honest
and very careful that you always play the game straight. Otherwise it is
deceitful and you’ll get caught and your prospects will lose confidence in
you. More importantly, you will lose respect for yourself and your selfimage will suffer, which means your sales will go down. (Part 2 of Secrets
of Closing the Sale explains why.)

Selling a Shoe Shine
I believe everyone sells and everything is selling. Here’s a story which
demonstrates voice inflection and some sales techniques we’ve been talking
about. In the late winter of 1976 I stopped in the St. Louis airport to change
planes. A quick glance at my shoes told me I needed a shine, and my watch

told me I had time. That pleased me, because in my opinion the best shoe
shiners in the whole world are in that St. Louis airport.
I walked into the little cubicle, and as I stood there the gentleman in the
third chair was stepping down. The young shoe shiner said to me, “Come
on in, you’re next.” I climbed up in the chair, and while he completed the
cash transaction with his customer, I looked over his prices. The prices at
that time (they’ve changed since then) were, “Regular Shine, 75¢. Wax
Shine, $1.00. Spit Shine, $2.00.” I decided to get the Regular Shine, tip him
a quarter, and be on my way.
When Johnny (he had a name tag) came to me after finishing with his
other customer, he asked, “What kind?” I responded, “Regular.” He took a
short step backward, looked up at me, and said, “Regular?!” (His inflection
had both a question and a you’ve-gotta-be-kidding tone.)
I knew then I was headed for an unusual shoe shine, but I wasn’t about to
let that dude get the best of me. I said, “Yeah, just give me the regular. You
guys do such a fantastic job, I know it’s going to be super good!” He never
grunted, never changed expression, never said anything. He reached for the
saddle soap and started cleaning my shoes by liberally applying it to both of
them. Next he got his cloth to wipe the shoes dry.
When he finished wiping the first one, he rubbed the shoe leather and
made it squeak so loudly you could have heard it a block away. He half
asked, half commented, “These are Ballys, aren’t they?” Zig: “Well, as a
matter of fact, they are.” Johnny: “Man, they are really nice shoes!” Zig:
“They ought to be!” Johnny: “They cost a lot of money, don’t they?” Zig:
“Yeah, they really do, but I’m not complaining, because these are the most
comfortable shoes I’ve ever worn.” Johnny: “They are nice shoes.”

The “Shame” Close
By then he had finished wiping the other shoe, so he picked up the shoe
polish. Before applying the polish he reached up, grabbed a pant leg, and
said, “This is one of the most unusual pieces of cloth I’ve ever felt.” He was
right. That particular suit was most unusual. Doyle Hoyer, the owner of
Glasgow Clothiers in Fort Madison, Iowa, sold me that suit, and he told me
that particular piece of cloth was from Ireland and would last me at least
five years. It was a marvelous, marvelous suit.

As I was telling Johnny all these things, he asked, “What kind of suit is
it?” I told him it was a Hickey-Freeman. “Man!” he said. “That is a nice
suit! They cost a lot of money, don’t they?” I replied that Hickey-Freeman
is a relatively expensive suit, but this one was especially expensive because
of the cloth. As a matter of fact, I spent over two hundred dollars more for
that suit than any suit I’d ever bought, but I was very happy with the
purchase.
By now he had the polish on the shoes and was really giving it that old
cloth-popping job. As a shoe shiner of considerable experience (two years
in the U.S. Navy), I know something about shining shoes. One thing I do
know is that if the guy doing the shining starts popping the cloth, he is not
shining the shoes any better but he is doing two things. First, as the late
Elmer Wheeler would say, he is “selling the sizzle,” and sizzle does sell,
and keeps the prospect sold, if it’s backed with substance. Second, he’s
letting the folks outside the shine booth know something exciting is going
on inside. He’s prospecting for that next customer, which is something all
professional salespeople regularly do.
Just as he finished one of the pops, he stopped, looked me in the eye, and
said, “You know, it just seems like a shame! [Pause.] A man will spend over
a hundred dollars for a pair of shoes; he’ll spend several hundred dollars for
a suit of clothes, and all he’s trying to do is look his best. [Pause.] And then
he won’t spend another dollar to get the best shine in the whole world to top
everything off!” [Pause.] Zig: “Spit on ’em, man, spit on ’em!” (In a
pleasant, humorous way he had shamed me into buying a better shine. He
put the other dollar into perspective by bringing the price of the shoes and
suit into focus.)

Sell It—Then Deliver
He finished the shine and it was a beauty! I don’t know how you are, but
I personally feel that when I get a seventy-five-cent shine, a two-bit tip is
fine. But whoever heard of a two-bit tip on a two-dollar shine? People with
any class just don’t do things like that! I gave Johnny a buck to go with the
other two and started walking out (strutting would be more accurate),
feeling like the king of the walk while thinking to myself, What in the world
is this guy doing shining shoes?

Then I looked up at the clock as it flipped to straight up and down, ten
o’clock. Now that’s very important, because when I sat down in the chair it
showed exactly three minutes to ten. I was in Johnny’s chair three minutes.
I gave him three dollars. You don’t have to be a Phi Beta Kappa out of
M.I.T. to know that a dollar a minute comes to sixty dollars an hour. Do you
realize that’s what some psychiatrists made at that time?
Now I’m not a mind reader, but I know what you’re thinking. Sixty
dollars an hour is $480 a day, and I know he’s not going to make that much,
so cut that in half. That’s $240. Cut that in half, and it’s $120. Cut that in
half (I’ll guarantee that you don’t have to cut it that last time) and that’s $60
a day. Even if you did, that would still leave him over $18,000 a year
shining shoes, and as we’d say down home, if he isn’t making over $20,000
a year (lots more than that today), there ain’t a dog in Georgia!
But hold the phone! There are two things you need to understand
thoroughly. Number one, he is a professional salesman. As a matter of fact,
his name tag also includes his title, “Shoeologist.” To the best of my
knowledge, he is the only one in the U.S. He is good.
Number two, he delivers everything he sells. (I’m personally convinced
our divorce rate would be reduced 90 percent if men and women delivered
in marriage what they sold while courting. I’m also convinced your sales
career will be even more rewarding if you deliver what you sell.) In short,
Johnny does a fantastic job of shining shoes. Fortunately, this story has not
one but two sequels.

The “Extra” Close
I was back in the St. Louis airport about a year after the first incident, so
I returned to the shoe-shine booth. I had my overnight bag with me, so I
hung it up before I sat down. By now they’d changed the price structure a
little. “Regular Shine” was a dollar, the wax shine had been eliminated, and
the name of the spit shine was “Best Shine.” The price was still $2.00. As I
sat down, Johnny asked me what kind of shine I wanted. I didn’t want to go
through the routine again, so I said, “Just give me the best!” He smiled,
said, “Okay,” and went to work.
I found out a long time ago that people do better when you treat them like
a good farmer treats his cows. I don’t know how much you personally know

about cows, so I’d like to share two things with you. Number one, I can tell
you from my experience, dating back to the time I was eight years old,
cows don’t “give” milk. You have to fight for every drop. Number two, I
can tell you the quality and quantity of the cow’s milk is directly related to
the way she is treated.
Walk into the barn and slap the old cow a couple of times, tell her that
her production is down, that her butterfat is lower than ever, and that you
feel she’s doing a lousy job. Kick her in the side and tell her she’s got to get
production up or she’s headed for the hamburger grill, and two things will
probably happen.
Number one, she might kick you back. Whether she does or not, I can tell
you with absolute certainty that you will not get nearly as much milk, and
the milk you do get will probably be unfit for human consumption. The old
cow would get so upset that a chemical change would literally take place in
her body and the milk would be sour or so bitter you could not drink it.
On the other hand, walk into the barn and pleasantly greet the cow— no,
I don’t necessarily think you have to kiss her, but it wouldn’t hurt you to
kind of rub her a little bit, maybe even put your arm around her. Tell her
she’s got to be the best-looking cow you’ve seen all morning, stroke her a
couple of times, and tell her what a nice, soft coat she has. Brag on her and
tell her you’re mighty proud of the production she’s given you in the past
and you just have a good feeling it’s going to get better and better. If no
one’s around, you might even tell her you love her. Not only will this
approach improve production but it will also improve the quality of the
milk.

Compliments Improve Competence
As a boy I saw it happen time after time. My mother loved all animals,
but she especially loved cows. When she bought a cow she would name her,
pet her, and treat her like a member of the family. I have seen her buy a
three-gallon-a-day producer (average for the 1930s and ’40s) on many
occasions and in a matter of weeks have the same cow producing four or
five gallons of milk per day.
Now in case you’re wondering what this has to do with shining shoes and
selling more merchandise, just read on. I knew Johnny would do a better

job of shining my shoes—despite the fact that I already felt he was the best
I’d ever seen—if I gave him a little encouragement. With this in mind I
started bragging on him. I told him he was doing a marvelous job and the
shine looked great. He shined my shoes to a standstill! As a matter of fact,
since I was the only customer and I was bragging on him so much, he just
kept shining my shoes. I finally told him I had to go, so he finished the job.
As I stepped down out of the chair, I made the observation to Johnny that
he obviously enjoyed shining shoes. His response to this was very positive.
He explained that he got a lot of pleasure in watching a person come in with
grubby-looking shoes and dragging bottom. He said that after a really good
shine many times the guys actually seemed to pick up their feet with a new
look of pride and enthusiasm.
“Yes,” he said, “I do like to shine shoes, but mainly I enjoy people. I
meet all kinds and most of them are nice folks so I really enjoy talking with
them.” To this I commented, “Well, you certainly do a beautiful job, not
only as a sales and public-relations man but also as a fantastic professional
at shining shoes.”
Johnny was beaming all the way through this, but as I stepped down out
of his chair, he said, “Could I ask you a question?” Zig: “Sure.” Johnny:
“Didn’t I see you with an overnight bag when you sat down?” Zig: “You
sure did.” Johnny: “Are you spending the night in St. Louis?” Zig: “Yes, I
am.” Johnny: “Do you by any chance have another pair of shoes in that
bag?” Zig: “As a matter of fact, I do.” Johnny: “You know, it’d really be a
shame—[pause] to have the most beautiful shine in St. Louis tonight and
then look like just one of the crowd tomorrow. It won’t take me but a
minute and you’ll be on your way!”

Deliver What You Sell
I left Johnny with five dollars that time! But again let me emphasize
something I stated earlier. Johnny is a professional salesman and he delivers
what he sells. For some strange reason a certain segment of our population
seems to believe the professional salesperson must have on a three-piece
suit, carry a fancy briefcase, and sell investments, computers, or some
specialized product like real estate trusts or mutual funds.

I’ve seen many people in those industries who were highly professional,
and I’ve seen some who had only the three-piece suit and the fancy
briefcase. By the same token, you can be a highly skilled professional
salesperson, as Johnny is, and sell shoe shines. The route salesman who
services bread racks or soft-drink racks in rural areas can be a truck driver
and delivery boy or he can become a well-paid professional salesman. Ditto
for the clerk in the discount store or the butcher behind the meat counter.
The professional learns his product, his job, and his clientele. He learns how
to use the right words and body language to persuade people to take action.
Then he makes absolutely certain he delivers everything he sells and then
some.

The “Add On” Close
Of even more importance is the fact that Johnny was not content to make
just the one sale. He saw a chance for the second and took advantage of the
opportunity. I think you already know I was not the least bit offended that
he wanted to sell me the second shoe shine. Actually, once you’ve gained
the confidence of your customers with the first sale, you are in a position to
be of real service to them. The first order is an indication of trust. If you
have companion products which your customers regularly use, you render a
service by saving them time, bookkeeping entries, and inventory problems
by helping them reduce the number of suppliers they deal with.
I’m not suggesting that if you have a multiple line you should try to sell
the entire line on every sales call. I am suggesting that if you believe in
what you sell and your customer is using similar products, you will do both
of you a favor by offering the other products, especially on the second and
subsequent sales calls.

The “Gloomy Gus” Close
Incredibly, the story has yet another sequel. One rainy day I was back in
the St. Louis airport changing planes again. This time Johnny was not there.
As I stepped into the chair, the shoe shiner (soon to be known as “Gloomy
Gus”) came to me and said, “Well, I suppose you want the Regular Shine?”
I looked at him with disbelief and said, “I can’t believe you said that! Why
would you offer me the Regular instead of the Best?” Gloomy Gus: “In

rainy weather people don’t want to spend two dollars for a shine and just
get it all messed up.” Zig: “Won’t the Best Shine give my shoes the best
protection?” Gloomy Gus: “Yes, it will.” Zig: “Well, why didn’t you offer
me the Best?” Gloomy Gus (or should it now be “Broken Record”?):
“People just don’t want to spend two dollars for a shine on a rainy day.”
Zig: “It seems to me that if the Best Shine gives the best protection and
your business is down on rainy days, you would work awfully hard to
increase the sales of your Best Shine.” Gloomy Gus: “Well, I suppose so.”
(He’s hard-core negative.)
Zig: “How would you like for me to give you a few words which would
double the number of Best Shines you sell?” Gloomy Gus (with the first
sign of a pulse beat): “Man, I would really like that! What are they?” Zig:
“The next time a customer comes in and sits down, the first thing you do is
look at his shoes. Then you look at his eyes, smile, and say to him, “Unless
I miss my guess, you’re the kind of guy who is going to want the best shine
we’ve got.” When he heard those words they apparently struck a responsive
chord, because he actually showed some enthusiasm as he said, “Man, give
me that one more time!” So I repeated the words.
Changing the Status Quo
I haven’t seen this guy again so I don’t know the rest of the story, but I do
know this: You can change everything about your business by changing
your thinking about your business. In short, if you don’t like the status quo,
change the status of your thinking and old “quo” is gonna be all right!
Regardless of what you’re selling, a little optimistic addition and positive
expectation to your presentation will increase your volume and hence your
profitability. I repeat, if what you’re selling is good, why would you hesitate
to offer it to the public in an optimistic manner?
Remember in dealing with your prospects that most people simply do not
like to make decisions. They’re somewhat like this old boy down home who
went to a psychiatrist. The psychiatrist stated, “I understand you have
trouble making decisions. Is that true?” The old boy looked at him
somewhat puzzled for a moment and said, “Well, yes and no.” That’s pretty
much the way many of our prospects are. They just don’t like to make
decisions. That’s the reason you are a salesperson. You are there to give

them information so they can be confident they are making the right
decision.
Yes, psychology is involved in everything we do. As we conclude this
segment on “The Psychology of Closing,” I encourage you to develop your
sales skills and techniques. I especially urge you—via the use of the
cassette recorder—to learn how to effectively use that voice of yours. Get
emotionally involved in persuading people to take action, really stay
motivated, hone your skills to a fine point, and I will SEE YOU AT THE
TOP!

PART 2

The Heart of Your Sales Career
OBJECTIVES
To get the person ready to be a better, more productive salesperson.
To explain selling as a transference of feeling.
To differentiate between sympathy and empathy and help you to think as
a buyer and as a seller.
To sell selling and professional preparation for professional results.
To explain the necessity of building a physical, mental, and spiritual
reserve.
To introduce love as the dominant factor in a successful sales career.
To explore the importance of honesty, conviction, and integrity as
absolute musts for an outstanding sales career.
CLOSES AND/OR PROCEDURES
The “Believer’s” Close
The “Ownership” Close Revisited
The “Get ’Em Smiling” Close
The “Empathy” Close
The “Physical Action” Close
The “Can’t Afford It” Close
The “Go Giver” Close
The “Columbus” Close
The “Courtship” Close

The “Testimonial” Close
The “Love” Close

7
The Critical Step in Selling
From the beginning we stated that the critical part of the sales process is the
honesty and integrity of the salesperson. When I speak of honesty I’m not
talking about paying your bills or writing good checks. In today’s
computerized age, when you give a hot check it’s discovered almost
immediately. If you don’t pay your bills, it becomes common knowledge
through the credit bureaus. It’s good business to write good checks and to
pay your bills.
When I speak of honesty in the world of selling, I go one step beyond
that—and that step is significant. The following two stories will spell out
exactly what I mean.

Ya Gotta Believe
Years ago (1963), I was the number one cookware salesman in America
for the Saladmaster Corporation of Dallas, Texas. We lived in Columbia,
South Carolina, and business was fantastic. An associate of mine, selling
the same product in the same town, was “starving to death.” Once, while
visiting in his home, we were in the kitchen having a cup of coffee, talking
about his sales decline, when the following dialogue took place:
Zig: “Bill, I know exactly what your problem is.” Bill: “What’s my
problem, Zig?” Zig: “Your problem is simple. You’re attempting the
psychologically impossible.” Bill: “What are you talking about?” Zig:
“You’re trying to sell a product you don’t enthusiastically believe in.” Bill:
“Zig, that’s crazy! Man, we’ve got the greatest set of cookware on the
American market! It’s absolutely fantastic! As a matter of fact, Zig, I left
the company I’d been with for four years and came with Saladmaster

because of the superiority of the product. In addition to that, I was a
manager with the other company and started here as a salesman because of
my belief in this product.”
Zig: “Aw, come on, Bill. Peddle that baloney to other people! I know you
and I know you don’t believe what you’re saying.” Bill (a little hot under
the collar): “You can say what you want to, but I know I believe in our
product.” Zig: “Bill, I can prove beyond any doubt that you do not really
believe in the product you sell.” And with that, I nodded toward the stove.
Bill: “Awwwww, you mean the fact that I’m cooking in a competitive set
of cookware?” Zig: “Bill, that’s exactly right.” Bill: “Zig, don’t give it a
thought. Man, that’s got nothing to do with it. I’m going to buy a set of our
cookware, but you know I’ve had my problems. We wrecked our car and
for a couple of months we had to depend on borrowed transportation, buses,
and taxis. Now, Zig, you know you can’t get the job done in the sales world
unless you have transportation you can depend on twenty-four hours a day.
“On top of that, my wife spent a couple of weeks in the hospital and I lost
a lot of time from work and spent a lot of money because we don’t have
hospitalization insurance. Now add the worry and concern I’ve had and
surely you can understand why it knocked us for a loop! And it’s not over,
because it looks like we’re going to have to put the boys in the hospital to
get their tonsils out and, Zig, we still don’t have any insurance! You’re right
when you say we should have a set of the cookware, and we are definitely
going to get a set, but the timing is just not right!”

Selling Is a Transference of Feeling
Zig: “Bill, let me ask you a question. How long have you been with this
company?” Bill: “Oh, about five years.” Zig: “Bill, what was your excuse
last year, and the year before that, and the year before that, and the year
before that, and the year before that? [Pause.] Let me tell you exactly what
happens when you get down to the ‘short rows’ [that’s Southern for
decision-making time], when you ask your prospect that obligating question
and he’s ‘thinking it over.’ The decision ball is up in the air; yes is full
commission, no is no commission.
“I can see the scene now, Bill, so let me paint the picture for you. The
customer is thinking out loud as he says, ‘I don’t know, Bill. Boy, we sure

need a good set of pots. I don’t know how my wife cooks in that stuff she
has, but it just doesn’t seem like the right time to get ’em now. My wife’s
been in the hospital, we just wrecked the family car, it looks as if the boys
are going to have to have their tonsils taken out, and we don’t even have
any insurance!’
“Now, Bill, you and I both know they’re not about to give you exactly
the same excuses you’ve been giving me. But we also know they are going
to give you the same excuses you’ve been giving yourself for the last five
years. You are well trained, Bill, so I know exactly what you are going to do
every time they give you an excuse for not buying. You’re going to sit there
with a forced grin on your face, saying to yourself, ‘Think positive now,
Bill, think positive, Bill!’ But all the time, deeeeeep down inside, you’re
going to be thinking, Yeah, I know exactly what you mean. That’s the reason
I don’t have a set of the stuff myself.
“Let me tell you something, Bill. The smartest thing you’ll ever do, even
if you’ve got to mortgage your furniture, is to buy a set of your own
cookware. Hear me on this, Bill [and I’m going to say to all my selling
friends as you read this book, if you stop reading right here or don’t believe
or follow through on anything else I say in this book, if you will buy—
without reservation—my next statement, you will immediately be more
effective at selling whatever you sell]:

Selling is essentially a transference of feeling.
If I (the salesman) can make you (the prospect) feel about my product the
way I feel about my product, you are going to buy my product if there is
any way in the world you can come up with the money.
“Now in order to transfer a feeling, you’ve got to have that feeling. When
you’re trying to persuade somebody to do something you have not done
yourself, that fact comes across to the prospect. Of course, all salesmen can
occasionally con a person into buying something he doesn’t really believe
in, but if you’re going to build an outstanding career, you’ve got to be
committed to the product yourself. You’ve got to believe, because as Bernie
Lofchick from Winnipeg, Canada, the greatest sales manager I know, says,
‘Believers are closers.’ ”

The very word close starts with a c. That c stands for conviction. Take the
c out of close and you have lose, which is what you and the prospect do
when your lack of conviction and belief influences the prospect in a no
decision.

You’ve Seen It Yourself
How many times have you seen a new and untrained person come into
your organization? He doesn’t know any of the “bear trap” closes and
doesn’t really know scientifically, psychologically, or technically how to
deal with all of the fancy objections, but oh, brother, does he ever believe in
the product he’s selling! He believes it would be the most serious mistake in
a lifetime if a person didn’t go ahead and buy immediately and put that
product to use. Net result: He sells rings around some of the established
pros. In my mind this proves that a green but convicted salesman is better
than a blue unconvicted one.
The epitome of this feeling is Willa Dorsey, the great Black spiritual
singer. Until you’ve heard her sing “Peace in My Soul,” you have missed
one of life’s most beautiful experiences. Willa says something all
salespeople can learn from when she talks about belief. She says, “If you’re
going to be convincing, brother, you’ve gotta be convinced!”

Buy It—and You Can Sell It
What about you? Are you convinced of the merits of your merchandise?
If you’re selling Fords and driving a Chevrolet, then, my friend, it’s costing
you a great deal of money. Believe in what you sell—or do yourself, your
company, your friends, your “victims,” and the profession of selling a favor.
Change products or get out of the profession. Your failure is predestined, so
why prolong the death rattle? The sooner you make the change into
something you can honestly and enthusiastically pursue, the sooner you will
start climbing the ladder to success. Obviously, there will be some
exceptions in buying or using what you sell. For example, if you sell
locomotives, million-dollar computers, or 747s, I don’t necessarily believe
you have to buy one to prove you believe in it!
To emphasize that point I make the following statement without
reservation: If you don’t believe the customers are the losers when they

don’t buy, you are selling the wrong product. If you don’t feel a sense of
loss for them, you are not going to be as effective and persuasive as you
could be. Selling is a transference of feeling, and your prospects are
persuaded more by your pride and belief in your product than by any
“proof” you submit regarding your product’s performance.
Until and unless you truly feel that nobody sells a better product value,
you really are not completely honest and your performance will not be at
the level you are capable of attaining. In that event you are obviously the
biggest loser because you will miss too many of the close ones.
The late Charles Roth said that many people feel if they utter the three
magic words Business is business they have license to lie, cheat, steal, and
in general “con” their fellow man. The fear that those things will happen
often exists in the mind of the prospect. Roth pointed out that a calm,
confident, positive, reassuring salesperson working from a base of honesty
and integrity is the most effective tool to calm the fears of the prospect and
get the sale. Yes, honesty is more than a moral issue. It is practical.

The “Believer’s” Close
To make a long story short, I sold Bill a set of the cookware. Don’t
misunderstand; he wrote his own order and bought it from himself. The
exciting “rest of the story” is that the additional sales Bill made that week
paid for his own set of cookware! The reason is simple. Every time
someone brought up the “can’t afford it” objection, Bill could handle it with
his head and his heart. Bill knew that he had dug in and bought his own
product when it hurt to do so. He understood how those prospects felt, but
now he was able to deal with them with empathy and not sympathy. (We
cover the difference in considerable detail in the next chapter.)

Bill understood how the prospects felt, but he did not feel the same way,
because he had bought his own set of cookware. He had made the sacrifice
so he could look them in the eye and say, “I know how you feel, but I know
from experience it’s worth the sacrifice. You’ll never regret it.” Results
were dramatic. His sales skyrocketed because he was selling from a belief
base tied directly to his heart.
You’ve gotta believe. I personally feel that honesty means we believe so
deeply, so completely, so fervently in what we are selling that we can’t
understand why other people don’t buy. When our belief is that deep, our
prospect picks it up. Chances are excellent you’ve had somebody say to
you, “I don’t know why I’m listing this home with you, or giving you my
business. There have been half a dozen people by here this week and I
turned them down.” Many times they really don’t know, but it gets down to
the basic fact that they trust you because of your conviction. They “feel”
they can depend on your integrity and fairness. Many times this trust is
because of the reputation you have built over a period of years and because
of that deep belief and feeling you have in and for your product which is
transferred to your prospect.
One of the major points—if not the major point—revealed in The Forum
Corporation study was the fact that high-performing salespeople are trusted
by their customers. They are trusted, over the long haul, for a very good
reason. They are trustworthy. Like I say, being honest is practical.

“Closers” Own What They Sell
Life insurance companies will tell you they can take a hundred
salespeople with at least one year’s experience and without looking at their
sales records predict within five percentage points what these salespeople,
as a group, are going to sell for the year. They make their predictions based
solely on the amount of insurance these people carry on their own lives.
You see, selling is a transference of feeling. The critical step in the world of
selling is this step of honesty which is your total conviction, your complete
belief that the product or service you sell is truly the best buy for the
prospect.
When I entered the world of sales training on a professional level, I
shared my experience with Bill (own what you sell) in a series of
recordings. An enthusiastic young fire-alarm salesman listened to the story
and realized he apparently did not believe in his product because he did not
own the alarm system himself. His conscience was prodded and he installed
the alarms in his own home. Later he wrote me and said, “You know, Zig,
the first month I had that set of alarms in my own home I made enough
extra sales to completely pay for them.”

The “Ownership” Close Revisited
Countless other salespeople, selling everything from cars and cosmetics
to insurance and soap, have shared the same experience. Once you’ve made
that emotional and financial commitment which says, “I believe in my
product so strongly that I bought it myself,” then you can transfer that
feeling to the other individual. In a nutshell, closers own what they sell.
When the prospect brings up a “can’t afford it” objection, you can with
considerable conviction point out that your product is so good it’s worth
sweating and sacrificing for. Obviously, you will be hypocritical and hence
not very convincing if you have not invested in your own product.
To repeat myself, if you are selling Fords, you should be driving a Ford.
If you sell 747s, locomotives, steamships, or multimillion-dollar computers,
you don’t need to buy one. But generally speaking, if it’s feasible, you
should believe in what you sell so much that you are willing, even anxious,
to sacrifice—if necessary—to own it.

By way of emphasizing this even further, if you do not honestly feel the
prospect is the loser if he doesn’t buy, then you’re not going to be nearly as
effective in the world of selling. How can you honestly feel the prospect is
going to “lose” if you are not “winning” by owning the product? Whatever
you’re selling should be much in evidence in your home, car, business, or
wherever it is used. By its presence you’re saying, “I believe.” Again:
Closers own what they sell.
Not only should you believe in the product you sell, but you should also
believe in and be loyal to the company you represent. Your effectiveness
and productivity will be affected by your feelings toward your management
and your company. I urge you to read Russell Conwell’s Acres of
Diamonds, which beautifully illustrates the fact that opportunity and “gold
mines” are everywhere—including right where you are. You can and will
find exactly what you look for in your life.
As a sales procedure it’s smart and professional to praise and build your
company everywhere you go. After all, how much confidence do you have
in someone who bad-mouths his mate, his city, his company, or any of the
people associated with the company?
Believe in your product and your company. Transfer that belief to the
prospect and not only will you sell more, you will sell it more easily, and
those customers will get you other customers. That’s career-building
selling.

8
The Big “E” in Selling
Psychologist H. M. Greenberg did a psychological evaluation on 186,000
people and discovered that one out of five could be trained to be a
successful salesperson. He also discovered that if anyone is going to be
outstanding as a salesperson, he has to have a special kind of ego. This
special ego requires the “food” of acceptance by the prospects he deals
with.
When a salesman calls on a prospect and is granted an appointment, the
prospect is really saying, “I buy you, so come on in and tell me the story.”
When the prospect becomes a customer, he is saying to the salesman, “I
trust you. I believe you’re telling me the truth, so go ahead and write the
order.”
Dr. Greenberg says the top salesman needs to make the sale primarily
because each sale is a reaffirmation of his own power, of his own ability,
and because failure to close threatens his self-esteem. He likes the conflict;
he likes to win; he likes to sell.
To be a truly outstanding salesman, you’ve got to have an ego, but
according to Dr. Greenberg, you’d better watch that salesman if all he has is
ego, because he will do just about anything to make the sale. The result is
disaster, for both customer and salesman. The customer is often abused and
the salesman will never build the sales career he’s capable of building. In
many cases he does well on a temporary basis, but his shortcuts,
misrepresentations, and exaggerations will eventually catch up and he will
have to move on to another city or another product line. Dr. Greenberg
emphasizes if you’re going to build a sales career, in addition to ego you’ve
got to have empathy.

Empathy vs. Sympathy. Despite the general use of the word empathy,
many people still do not recognize the difference between empathy and
sympathy and their application in the world of selling. This understanding
is important, because if we tie empathy to ego, there’s little danger we’re
going to oversell, which is sometimes a problem in the sales world.
Sympathy means you feel like another person feels. Empathy means you
understand how the other person feels, though you do not feel the same
way.
Example: When you observe a passenger leaning over the rail of a ship,
suffering from seasickness, sympathy is perfectly demonstrated when you
join him at the rail. Empathy is when you understand how the passenger
feels, so you get him a cold towel and some seasickness pills to help him
solve the problem. With empathy you understand and are sensitive to the
feedback from the other person. You’re not part of the problem, so you can
back away and become part of the solution.
A marriage counselor with sympathy can get so involved in the other
person’s problems that eventually he might need counseling himself. An
arrested alcoholic with sympathy in trying to counsel a practicing alcoholic
will often tragically get back on the bottle. A sales manager with sympathy
will end up broke and, in some cases, lose his effectiveness. He will lend
his salespeople money and on occasion will end up doing their work for
them.
Parents with too much sympathy will let their kids do and have
everything they could not do or have as kids, so they often raise spoiled,
undisciplined, and unproductive children.
The reason most doctors and lawyers don’t treat members of their own
families or take them as clients is they are so involved in the problem they
can’t back away and objectively look at the solution.
Empathy is different. You understand the problem, and you know exactly
how the prospect feels, but because you don’t feel that way, you can back
away from the problem and offer some solutions. In this part of the book
my objective is to get you to think both as a buyer and as a seller. To be
truly professional you must be able to move comfortably from the seller’s
side of the table to the buyer’s side. If you know how your prospect thinks

and feels, you’re definitely going to sell more of what you’re selling
because you will communicate more effectively.
With empathy the following little dissertation on business (author
unknown) takes on significant meaning.
When we separate the word business into its component letters, B-U-S-IN-E-S-S, we find that U and I are both in it. In fact, if U and I were not in
business, it would not be business. Furthermore, we discover that U comes
before I in business and the I is silent—it is to be seen, not heard. Also, the
U in business has the sound of I, which indicates it is an amalgamation of
the interests of U and I. When they are properly amalgamated, business
becomes harmonious, profitable, and pleasant.

Don’t Confuse Situations
Much of this is just common sense. Realistically, a certain percentage of
this is “old stuff.” Now before you discount anything for that reason, let me
remind you that the procedure or information is old because it is good. If
the results weren’t good, the techniques would not be old—they would be
dead. We weave the “old stuff” into much of the new material because you
personally might not be familiar with all the information, and if you are it’s
still true that we may not need to be told—but we do need to be reminded.
As a salesperson it should be obvious to you that you never confuse your
situation with your prospect’s situation. You must remember that your
wants, needs, desires, tastes, and capacity to pay have no bearing on your
prospect’s needs, wants, desires, and ability to pay.
As an example, you might be a clothing salesperson with personal tastes
that are flashy. If a conservatively dressed businessman comes in for a suit,
you obviously want to take note of what he’s wearing. Then think in terms
of what he wants and needs. If he looks at an expensive suit or sports coat
which you could not afford, it doesn’t mean you should try to talk him
down to a less expensive item. Far from it.
If, on the other hand, you could afford something nicer but your prospect
cannot, you should not try to sell him something which is completely out of
his price range. Be very careful not to turn up your nose at a bargain-

basement suit since you would not wear such a thing. Remember, for him
that suit might be the epitome of luxury.
The same principle applies whether you’re selling cars, houses, life
insurance, or investments. In short, don’t confuse your situation with his.
Look at the goods, products, or services you sell through his eyes. That’s
empathy—and that’s the professional way.

Eager He Was—Professional and Empathetic He Wasn’t
Good technique at the wrong time can be disastrous, because there is
such a thing as the 100 percent wrong time to try to sell even a superb
product. Undoubtedly the worst bit of timing I have ever encountered
occurred not long after we moved to Dallas. Our son, Tom, was a little less
than four years old. Late one afternoon we suddenly missed him. We
immediately went to the homes on either side of our house. We looked up
and down the street and in the back alley. Then I quickly hopped in my car
and drove up to the intersection and through the parking lot of the small
shopping center. In the meantime, my wife was busy calling the neighbors
and our girls were out scouring the neighborhood and calling at the tops of
their voices for Tom. There was no response.
We looked fast and furiously for what seemed like an eternity, but in
reality it was probably no more than twenty minutes; by then we were
getting scared. I called the Dallas police and told them our problem, and in
a matter of minutes they responded and joined the search. In the meantime,
I made another trip to the shopping center, circled the block, and went up
and down the alleys, rolling down my windows and calling for Tom
everywhere I went. In the process I aroused the concern and interest of
several neighbors who also joined in the search.
Naturally, I checked back by the house every few minutes. During one of
these check-ins I encountered a salesman for one of the local patrol
organizations which are very much in evidence in our society today.
I blurted out that my son was missing and asked if he would help us find
him. Incredibly enough, the man started trying to sell me his patrol service.
As he started his presentation I was in some shock, and when he continued
it for a few more seconds, I stopped and—partially in disbelief, partially in

frustration, partially in anger—explained rather heatedly that if he would
help me find my son, then we would talk about his services.

His Empathy Was Nonexistent
His timing could not have been worse. Surely no one with enough
intelligence to get out of a phone booth without written directions on the
side would ever make such a mistake. I use the example only to point out
that timing combined with empathy is prerequisite to sales success.
Sensitivity to the other person’s needs and interests is of paramount
importance. For example, had the patrol salesman joined in the search, in
just twenty minutes he would have made the easiest sale in his career. You
guessed it—we found our son.
As a rule of thumb, when I call someone on the phone, whether it’s for a
social or a business call, after the initial greeting I always ask a question in
this manner: “Did I catch you at a busy time, or do you have four [or seven,
nine, etc.—all other salesmen ask for five, ten, etc.] minutes to talk?” Not
only is this a courteous move, but in my judgment it’s good selling. If my
prospect’s mind is somewhere else, my chances of a sale are greatly
reduced.
In personal contacts, if your prospect is obviously not with you, I urge
you to stop your presentation and say, “Mr. Prospect, apparently I’ve caught
you at a bad time. Would you be freer to discuss this proposal at a later
time, or would you prefer that I continue?” It’s tough to sell when he’s not
paying attention. A move like this will bring his mind back to the
presentation if he was just thoughtlessly drifting. If he is preoccupied,
chances are good he will appreciate your consideration and give you an
appointment for a later time. This will partially obligate him to you to the
degree that he will probably give you his undivided attention when you
return.
As you have undoubtedly discovered a few dozen times in this book,
common sense and good sales techniques are interwoven so completely it’s
impossible to separate them.

The “Get ’Em Smiling” Close

As a sales trainer, I’m going to suggest that if you can get your prospects
smiling and agreeing with you as you go into the body of your presentation,
your chances of making a sale are considerably greater. The reason is
simple: They must buy you before they will buy your ideas or services. A
friendly smile or a laugh is a reasonably good indication they are buying
you as a person and will therefore be more likely to buy what you are
selling. And it is unlikely your prospect is going to have negative feelings
about your product or services with a big smile on his face or after a good
laugh.
As a salesman, I’m convinced it is impossible to be completely wrapped
up in what you are doing and not in rare instances get a rise out of a
prospect who is offended by your zeal and commitment. This could and
should happen, but (now read this carefully) it should happen so rarely that
you know, and you know that you know, it’s the prospect who has the
problem. On pages 332–36 I cover the procedure you should use to calm
the prospect and make the sale.
Now let’s look at two examples which clearly demonstrate that sympathy
costs you and the prospect while empathy pays you and the prospect.

Sympathy Costs
Many years ago, not long after I started my career in the cookware
business, I called on a farmer and his wife who had attended my
demonstration the night before. We were back in the kitchen when I made
my presentation—which I’ll never forget.
When I finished he just held up his hand and said, “Mr. Ziglar, this
probably won’t mean much to you because I know you’ve got a bathroom
inside your house. But me and my wife have been married over twenty
years, and for twenty years I’ve been promising her, ‘Next year, honey,
we’re going to build a bathroom.’ Every year it’s always ‘next year,’
because one year we would have a bad crop, another year the baby would
get sick, or we had to buy a new tractor.”
He continued, “For over twenty years I’ve been struggling to build that
bathroom, and I’ve finally got that money right here, right now.” (As he
said this he patted his money pocket, which was at the top center of the

overalls.) “But,” he said, “ain’t you or nobody else going to get one dime of
my money until we build that bathroom.”

Who Sells Whom?
I emphasize this: A sale is made on every presentation. The prospect
either sells you that he can’t or won’t buy or you sell him that he can and
should buy. In this case and at that time of my career, I was badly
overmatched. That old boy was a super salesman and he had a fantastic
prospect (me) who was far too willing to buy what he was selling. In short,
I was sympathetic—and here’s why.
When I was a boy we had “running water” at our house, which means
that we had to “run and get it,” if you know what I mean. When he hinted
about those cold, wet trips which you associate with outdoor bathrooms,
even though it was August I shivered three times! I had so much sympathy
for his situation I wouldn’t have done anything to jeopardize that old boy’s
bathroom, so I folded my tent and “stole away like a thief in the night!”
I left graciously and pleasantly because my friend and first sales trainer,
Bill Cranford, had taught me when you miss a sale you should always
terminate the interview in such a way that the next salesperson can easily
gain admission to that prospect’s mind. In show business they tell you to
“leave ’em laughing.” In sales the professional terminates the interview
with the prospect in at least a friendly frame of mind. In this case, I was
confident we had parted on friendly terms because he even invited me back
for a cup of coffee if I was ever in the neighborhood again.
Two days later I bumped into his sister on the streets of the little town of
Lancaster, South Carolina. Even though this was in 1948, I still remember
the conversation. (Incidentally, she had a vested interest in the sale, because
if her brother had bought she would have gotten a premium.)
Sister: “What in the world happened to you and my brother?” Zig: “What
do you mean, ‘What happened?’ ” Sister: “He’s so mad at you I think he’ll
whip you if he ever sees you again!” Zig: “Him—mad at me? A nice guy
like me?” Sister: “He sure is!” Zig: “Well, why is he mad at me?” Sister:
“Very simple. He wanted to buy a set of pots and you wouldn’t even sell
’em to him!” Zig: “Well, I’ll go back out there right now!” Sister: “It’s too
late. He doesn’t trust you anymore!”

Hear What the Prospect Is Saying—Not Just What He Says
For a long time I could not conceive of the difficulty. I won’t tell you that
one day it hit me like a bolt out of the blue, because it didn’t. But over a
period of time the basic problem became clear to me. I had heard every
word the old boy said, but didn’t hear a word he was saying. Let me
explain.
I had demonstrated and proved beyond any reasonable doubt that our set
of cookware would save money, work, and food value. The farmer and his
wife had seven small children between the ages of two and sixteen. It was
obvious they had a large family, because I don’t care how clever you are,
you just can’t hide seven small children in a little house.
This man had seen and heard the benefits of the cookware at the
demonstration. The next day at the presentation in his home, he said, “I’ve
been working over twenty years to get the money to build my bathroom.
I’ve got it right here, but neither you nor anybody else is going to get one
dime of it until we build that bathroom.” That’s what he said, but that is not
what he was saying.
He was saying, “Mr. Ziglar, for over twenty years I’ve been struggling,
trying to raise the money to build a bathroom, but at long last I’ve got the
problem solved.” (He even patted his money pocket.) His body language
and home environment were also saying, “Look, I’ve got seven kids and I
want to feed them the best food at the lowest possible price with the most
food value. My wife, bless her heart, being the mother of seven children
and a farm wife, too, she’s working herself to death. Mr. Ziglar, do you have
anything that would save her some work, my children some food value, and
me some money?”
That’s what he was saying! That’s what his environment was saying. But
I was so wrapped up in sympathy with a problem he had already solved that
I lost sight of or failed to recognize his much bigger problem, namely,
feeding those kids the best way and taking a work load off his wife.
Obviously, if you are not completely tuned in to your prospect’s major
need, you are not going to offer a solution. Sympathy cost me the sale, but
of infinitely more importance, it cost the prospect the use of a product that

would have been very beneficial to him. Sympathy costs the salesperson
and the prospect.
Or It Could Have Been . . . There are a few other possibilities in this
scenario. Number one, my demonstration had been “rigged.” The cookware
really would not save food value; it would not save the farmer’s wife work;
it would not save the money which I had demonstrated it would. In short, I
had lied to the man. Or the possibility exists that the farmer thought those
things when I walked out so easily. Had my conviction about my product
and my concern for the farmer been strong, he would have had to feel that I
would stand my ground and plead my case more fervently for him to buy.
On the other side of that coin is the fact that the cookware was what I
said it was. It really would save work as well as food value, and it would
save the money. But the farmer could have figured that I, as a salesman,
was interested in a fast sale and an easy buck, and when I saw that I was not
going to get either of them, in essence I said to him, “Just forget about it,
friend. I’ll go somewhere else and find an easier sale.”
Now please understand. There was no way I could climb down into his
mind and know what he was or was not thinking, but I do offer these as
possibilities. There’s yet another possibility in the farmer’s mind. When I
stuck my ego out just a little and asked for the order, only to be rejected, the
farmer could have thought I was overly sensitive to my own feelings and
not sensitive enough to his needs. Thus when he slightly stepped on my
ego, I quickly withdrew. Farmer’s interpretation: Zig’s interested in himself,
not in solving my problems. If that was the case, it should be obvious that
any salesman who is “wrapped up in himself” makes a mighty small
package!
As I say, there are many possibilities, but they all come out with the same
result. I missed a sale and the commission which went with it. The farmer
and his family missed the benefits which would have been theirs had I been
professional and competent in dealing with this prospect.

Empathy Pays
Empathy is different. Jay Martin, a friend of mine from Memphis,
Tennessee, is the president of National Safety Associates, a company which
sells smoke-and-fire detectors. He tells this story: One evening he was

working with one of his young dealers. The dealer made a good, solid
presentation to a prospect. When he finished he asked the obligating
question. Then, Jay said, “Zig, this old boy, who probably didn’t finish the
first grade, reared back on the hind legs of his chair, folded his arms, and
said, ‘Well, son, of course you’ve heard about my wreck!’ The young man
hadn’t, so the prospect proceeded to give him all the details.”

This Guy Had Problems
Prospect: “Me and my wife were driving down the highway a couple of
months ago and this dude who was passing on the wrong side of the road hit
us head-on, tore our car all to pieces, and put us both in the hospital. As a
matter of fact, I was in there nearly two weeks myself and it left my ankle
kind of stiff. Since I work on a piece-good basis, I haven’t been able to get
around as well and my income’s down and, man, that sure hurts!
“My wife was in the hospital over six weeks and she was gone so long
her company phased out her job, so she’s not even working. When you’ve
been used to two incomes and all of a sudden you’ve only got one, man,
that sure creates a problem! The hospital bill for both of us was over twenty
thousand dollars. Now I know the insurance company’s eventually going to
pay it, but they sure have us nervous in the meantime!
“On top of all of that, just last week our boy came home from the navy
and the first night at home he rounded a curve too fast, went over an
embankment and down into a service station, tore up our other car, and
destroyed a six-thousand-dollar oil company sign. Now I know the
insurance is going to pay for the car, but I don’t know about that sign. I’ll
tell you right now, if we have to come up with six thousand dollars, we’re
really going to be up a creek and I don’t know what we’ll do!
“If all of that isn’t enough, just last night we checked my mother-in-law
into the most expensive nursing home in the county. The only other living
relative is a brother and I know he won’t do anything. He hasn’t even been
heard from in over a year and he’s not worth shooting even if we did know
where he was. I know I’m going to have to carry the whole load.”

The “Empathy” Close

As you review this old boy’s problems, the chances are excellent you feel
good about your situation in life, don’t you? I mean, he did have a pretty
heavy load to carry. If you were the salesman on this call and you had a lot
of sympathy, you would probably say, “Oh, that’s just terrible, and I’ll bet
it’s even worse than that! You just don’t want to make me feel bad and
that’s the reason you’re not telling me the rest of it! But let me ask you a
question. Won’t the government do something? What about the Red Cross?
What about your neighbors? Won’t the church make a contribution? Can’t
you at least get food stamps?” Now that’s sympathy, but according to Jay
Martin this salesman did not have sympathy. He had empathy.
With empathy you are emotionally detached from the problem so you can
offer solutions. You move from your side of the table to the prospect’s side.
Realistically that is where the sale is going to be made, and the chance of
that happening is greatly increased, because from his side of the table you
can make your presentation from his point of view.
According to Jay, that’s what the young dealer was able to do. He looked
the prospect in the eye and said, “Tell me, sir, in addition to those things,
would there be any other reason you could not go ahead and protect the
lives of your family by installing these smoke-and-fire detectors in your
home?”
I don’t know if you know what a conniption is, but that’s exactly what
that old boy had. He literally roared with laughter, slapped his leg, and said,
“No, son, those are the only reasons we couldn’t go ahead and buy the
alarms today. Ha, ha, ha!” (At that point I believe it would be safe to say
that he did not consider himself a prospect.)

The “Physical Action” Close
Strategically the salesman had made a very wise move. You should bring
out all the objections as early as possible so you can deal with them in the
body of the presentation or early in the negotiating phase of selling.
When the salesman learned there were no other reasons for not buying,
he never hesitated. He reached down into his sample case (Jay Martin calls
this the “Physical Action” Close) and removed one of the smoke detectors.
He held the detector up against the wall to let the prospect see how it looked
and said, “Sir, as nearly as I can tell, you now owe nearly thirty thousand

dollars [pause]—and three hundred more just won’t make any difference at
all.” (Pause—followed by the statement that got the sale.) He lowered his
voice, looked the man in the eye, and quietly said, “Sir, fire—under any
circumstances—is devastating. But in your case, it would wipe—you—
out!” The technique was professional, the logic was sound. He got the sale.
He took the reason the old boy was giving him as to why he could not
buy and used that as the reason he must buy. I don’t care what you sell, the
odds are at least ten to one that the prospect’s reason for not buying can be
used as a reason he should buy. That last sentence is quite significant, so
let’s explore it further.

The “Can’t Afford It” Close
In 1978 we had a severe hailstorm in Dallas. The winds blew, the hail
fell, and rain came down in sheets. The next morning a nice little artistic
design on the ceiling in our living room, den, and kitchen indicated we had
a real problem. We called the roofer and his estimate came to something
over $5,300. Now if I had said, “Can’t afford it!” the salesman, assuming he
was a pro, would have said to me, “Mr. Ziglar, if you can’t afford to repair
your roof, won’t it be even more difficult after a few more rainstorms to
afford the new furniture, the paint job, and the new insulation in the attic,
and still have to afford the new roof?”
One more time: Chances are excellent you can use the prospect’s reason
for not buying as the reason he ought to buy. “What do you mean, ten
dollars to balance a tire? I can’t afford to pay that kind of money!” “Mr.
Prospect, if you can’t afford ten dollars to balance a tire, then how will you
be able to afford the greater expense of the new tire you’re going to need
much sooner?”
“Premiums! Man, I can’t pay any more life insurance premiums now!”
You’ve heard it a thousand times: “I’m already insurance-poor!” To begin
with, I would say, “I’ve never met a widow who felt that her husband
carried too much life insurance.” That’s the first thing. And the second: “If
you, working full-time, cannot pay the premium, how will your family pay
the grocery bill and the house payment if you are not there to work at all?”
“All that money for storm windows? Can’t afford it!” “Mr. Prospect, if
you can’t afford the bill for the storm windows, what about the ever-

increasing fuel bill?” Whatever the reason they give you for not buying, you
can generally use that as the reason they ought to buy.
My salespeople (me, too) are confronted with the same objection after a
presentation. “I can’t afford it!” We teach our sales reps to look at the
prospect and, with a smile, softly say, “Sir, if you are serious when you say
you can’t afford a few dollars for this training course on closing the sale,
may I gently suggest you need to take whatever steps are necessary to get
this course? The reason is simple: The techniques and closes will help you
close more sales. By the way, sir, how many extra sales would you need to
make in order to get your entire investment back?”
As you explore what empathy and ego are all about, you’ll discover that
what I’m really saying is, “Move to the prospect’s side of the table, identify
the problem, get involved in the solution, and your closing percentage will
increase.”

This Attaché Case Looks like Brother Bern
One day several years ago I received a call from the Redhead, who was
doing her (I should say “our”) Christmas shopping. She was at NeimanMarcus and was excited about an attaché case she had just seen. Her
observation was, “Honey, this attaché case looks exactly like Brother
Bern!”
Now, rather obviously, she did not mean that they had made an attaché
case in the configuration of my brother Bern from Winnipeg, Canada. What
she did mean was, had Bernie Lofchick been in Neiman-Marcus shopping
for an attaché case, after looking at all of them he would have chosen this
one and said, “This one fits me. This one looks like me.”
Empathy is the ability to get inside the feelings of the other person and
look at his wants and needs through his eyes. The Redhead was doing that
in the purchase of that particular attaché case. There’s an old adage which
says, If you’re going to sell John Jones what John Jones buys, you’ve got to
sell John Jones through John Jones’ eyes. That’s empathy.
Empathy is what you use—or should be using—when you buy your
friend, wife, husband, children, boss, or employee a gift of any kind. You

should be thinking in terms of what that person would choose or would like
if he or she were making the purchase.
Empathy, from the retail salesperson’s point of view, can substantially
increase sales when you deal with those shoppers who are buying for
someone else. Example: Psychologist Erwin S. Weiss of Cleveland, Ohio,
said that grandparents generally want to give gifts to be remembered,
parents give gifts which are practical, and youngsters give gifts to please
their immediate interests. Armed with this basic information, an alert clerk
can concentrate the prospect’s looking time and his own sales efforts on
those items which most nearly fill the bill for the shopper who is buying
gifts.

Empathy Improves Teamwork
Ted Lamb is a successful Chevrolet dealer in Prescott, Arizona. In 1982
(a serious recession year for the auto industry), Lamb Chevrolet increased
its unit sales by 69 percent over 1981 and its dollar volume by 68 percent
over 1981. From a profitability point of view, 1982 was Lamb’s best year as
a Chevrolet dealer.
Many factors enter the picture when you start asking the why and how of
such a tremendous year. To begin with, Ted is a hardworking optimist who
is civic minded and family oriented. He is also a creative manager with a
“go give” spirit. And he possesses a tremendous amount of empathy.
All successful businesses must have a spirit of oneness and teamwork
among the various departments. This is especially true in the automobile
business, in which cooperation between sales and service rates at the top of
the totem pole in importance. On too many occasions, communication
breakdowns occur because the sales department can’t understand why the
service department is unable to give 100 percent instantly perfect service to
all reasonable and unreasonable customers. By the same token, the service
people can’t understand why salespeople constantly put them on the spot
with “impossible” and often “idiotic” requests for service.
At Lamb Chevrolet those communication problems are few and far
between because of a unique procedure initiated several years ago.
Periodically the service manager and the sales manager (who incidentally
enjoy the same income) swap hats, departments, and responsibilities for a

few days. This way each manager literally does walk in the other manager’s
shoes. He gains considerable insight into the day-to-day responsibilities,
opportunities, and yes, even challenges the other manager faces. In the
process he develops considerable empathy for his companion manager’s
role. Needless to say, when each manager returns to his own stand, it is with
a deeper appreciation and understanding of the role the other manager plays
in the daily operation of the business.
This process produces three winners. Each manager gains a new
appreciation for the familiar waters of his own job and the unfamiliar
waters of the other manager’s job, so he wins. The customer wins because
of better service in both departments. Lamb Chevrolet wins because the
team spirit in all departments enables them to serve their customers better,
which means they have more customers to serve.

9
The Right Mental Attitude
As we carefully explore the building of a sales career, one area that stands
near the top of the must list is the development of the right mental attitude.
My book See You at the Top deals with attitude in considerable depth, so
I’m not going to go into extensive detail concerning attitude as it relates to
closing the sale. However, there are four phases of attitude which I feel are
critical if you’re going to close the sale instead of get close to the sale.
First, we will look at attitude in general. Second, we will look at your
attitude toward you, meaning essentially your self-image. Third, we will
explore your attitude toward the prospects you’re going to be dealing with;
and fourth, we will look at your attitude toward the profession of selling.

Positive Thinking Can Be Frustrating
As an advocate of positive thinking, I frequently encounter people who
are enormously confused about the subject. They often think we positive
thinkers believe that with positive thinking we can do anything. That’s
ridiculous. Positive thinking won’t let you do anything, but it will help you
do everything better than negative thinking will.
I don’t care how positive I became, I could not whip the heavyweight
champion of the world. As a matter of fact, I don’t even believe I could take
out your appendix and have you live. But this I know, if you and I were
isolated on a desert island a thousand miles from everybody and you were
to suffer an attack of appendicitis, I personally believe you would prefer I
approach you with a winning attitude!
Surely you would feel much better if I were to enthusiastically say, “I’m
not a doctor, but reading a lot and watching a lot of television give me

reason to be positive. In the last week I watched three appendectomies and,
fortunately, I have an extremely sharp knife with me and some powerful
medicine that will kill all the infection. [My optimistic nature would have
me going after Moby Dick in a rowboat and taking the tartar sauce with
me!]
“Personally I believe that despite my lack of training I can get your
appendix out of there, and I just flat believe you’re going to make it!” Odds
are great you would prefer that approach and attitude over my looking you
in the eye and saying, “Man, you’re gonna die!”
As a practical matter, there isn’t one doctor in a hundred who wouldn’t
agree that the first approach would give you a much better chance of
surviving.

You Can Do It—Here’s How
Realistically there is a chance that pure positive thinking and motivation
without direction can lead to frustration. For example, someone convinces
you that you’ve got what it takes. They say, “Go for it. I know you’re going
to make it,” and then send you out with no training or direction. There is a
chance you will fall flat on your face and become frustrated and dejected.
With this in mind, let me briefly identify what I believe. Positive thinking
is an optimistic hope—not necessarily based on any facts—that you can
move mountains. I’ve seen positive thinking move some mountains. Positive
believing is the same optimistic hope, based on reasons for believing you
can move those mountains. I’ve seen positive believing move far more
mountains.
Secrets of Closing the Sale is a book of positive believing. It gives you
reasons for believing you can move those mountains (make more sales). It
gives you the methods, techniques, and procedures which, when applied,
will result in more sales. The game plan for Secrets is simple: I will never
make a promise—unless I give you a plan and procedure to make that
promise possible.
As a practical matter, we can theoretically teach you every situation
known to man in a book or in the classroom. Then guess what happens?

The first day in the field the theory is shot down by some customer who
hasn’t read the book or attended our training classes.
He asks some question or brings up some objection which we had not
considered. The only way you’re ever going to be able to handle those
situations is from the personal experience you have out in the field on an
eyeball-to-eyeball basis with a customer. The information in this book,
combined with the specifics from your company sales trainers, plus your
experience in the field, will form a powerful combination to enable you to
become the professional you aspire to be.

Your Mental Attitude Makes the Difference
Your mental attitude and everything else about you is influenced or
controlled by what goes into your mind. It’s safe to say that you are what
you are and where you are because of what has gone into your mind. You
change what you are and where you are by changing what goes into your
mind.
Chances are excellent you want most of the things in life everyone else
wants: good health, extra money, security, friends, peace of mind,
happiness, and all the good stuff. Assuming you either don’t have all these
things or at least don’t have them in the amount or to the extent you desire
them, two possibilities exist.
First, you might be too young and simply haven’t had enough time. (If
you’re over thirty, I hope you don’t hide behind that one.) Second, and far
more likely, your behavior is not producing the desired results. This being
the case, it should be clear that you need to change behavior if you are
going to get what you want. What might not be so obvious is the fact that
before you can change your behavior you must change your thinking. But
before you can change your thinking you must change the input into your
mind.
If we really do want what we say we want—good health, extra money,
security, friends, peace of mind, happiness—we must put those positive
goals into our minds. This input comes from positive friends and associates.
Additional input must come from reading the right kind of books, listening
to the right kind of recordings, and attending educational, motivational
seminars. Through these sources we plant those desirable thoughts of good

health, extra money, security, friends, peace of mind, and happiness in our
heads.
Buy this next thought and you will sell more of what you sell:

Your business is never really good or bad “out there.” Your
business is either good or bad right between your own two ears.
Example: At this moment you are in the best place at the best time to do
the most selling. (Yes, that is realistic. The only time you have and are sure
of is the time you have right now. Since you are where you are and nowhere
else, you can sell only where you are, so you are at the right place at the
right time.)
Many “Gloomy Guses” and “prophets of doom” spread their gloom by
periodically announcing we’re headed for a business slump. Without fail,
about every four or five years they announce the coming “recession.”
Speaker Don Hutson of Memphis, Tennessee, points out that the media has
accurately predicted eighteen of the last two recessions. (You might need to
think about that one.) When they announce the next recession, you’ve got to
make a choice to join or not to join. I’m in favor of joining some clubs like
the Rotary, the Lions, Civitan, and other outstanding service organizations,
but personally I’m not in favor of joining the recession club.
In my travels I see people in every walk of life selling every conceivable
product, from ten-cent whatnots to multimillion-dollar computers.
Regardless of the company, industry, or section of the country, some are
doing extremely well, some are doing fairly well, and some are going
broke. The business is there for all, but, everything else being equal, the
salesperson with a good self-image and positive mental attitude will get
more than his share of business and the salesperson suffering from “stinkin’
thinkin’ ” will get a much smaller share.

The “Go Giver” Close
One excellent example of the right mental attitude is the story of Calvin
Hunt from Victoria, Texas. Calvin became one of the really great
professional life insurance salesmen in this country. A former Houston

Oiler offensive lineman and an extremely creative, civic-minded citizen,
Calvin used a lot of the little extras to produce business. His attitude was
certainly one of his outstanding assets. Each year he would invite an
inspirational speaker as a community service for the town. He reserved the
front rows of the auditorium for his clients and invited the general public to
occupy the remaining seats. There was no charge to anyone for this.
Calvin was one of those multimillion-dollar producers who wrote
contracts involving well over $100,000 in premiums. He had a chauffeurdriven limousine, and while he was being driven to his appointments, which
were sometimes 20 miles or 120 miles away, he prepared his presentation
and took care of the details of his business.
He explained to me that in 1982 roughly half the insurance people felt
business was down and, consequently, they reduced their efforts. Calvin did
explain that business was down a little, but half of his competition was not
really working to expand their businesses. Since there was about 90 percent
as much business available and only 50 percent as much competition,
Calvin figured his business had to increase substantially. As you might
suspect, his business did increase dramatically that year. Yes, attitude does
make a difference.

10
Your Attitude toward You
If you’re really interested in building your sales career, or for that matter
any other kind of career, you’ve got to start by building a healthy selfimage. One of my early mentors, the late Dr. Emol Fails of Raleigh, North
Carolina, said you don’t build a business—you build people—and then
people build the business.
When we talk about closing sales we’ve got to face the fact that many
salespeople are colorful. By colorful I mean they’re yellow! They just flat
don’t ask for the order! They talk and talk and talk but they don’t ask for the
order because they have that fear of rejection. Outstanding sales trainer
Chris Hegarty points out that 63 percent of all sales interviews end with no
direct effort on the salesperson’s part to close the sale.
The salesperson doing all the talking is desperately hoping the prospect
will interrupt the presentation and say, “OK, I’ll take it.” This way the
salesman won’t have to risk his ego by making a direct closing effort and
chancing a direct refusal.

Salesperson or Professional Visitor
In my own career I’ve been on sales calls and watched the salesperson
drone on and on and on and never get around to asking for the order. I’ve
even heard prospects say, “Well, John, you’re not trying to sell me
something, are you?” And the salesman would verbally back away and say,
“Oh, noooo, noo, no!” Makes you wonder who he thought he was 108 and
what he thought he was doing, doesn’t it? Apparently he thought he was a
professional visitor. If that’s what you think you are, then this chapter will
be very important to you.

Now as I understand it, the purpose of the sales interview, whether you
go to see the prospect or he comes to see you, is to get the order. Yet
because of poor self-image and this fear of rejection, 63 percent of all sales
interviews wind down and drift into oblivion without a direct effort to close
the sale.
So important is your self-image in improving your closing skills and
effectiveness that I want to digress for a moment and give you a sales talk
on doing something about your own self-image. If you have a problem with
yours, and you are the only person who really knows whether you do or not,
I urge you to get busy and do something about it.
One of the many steps you can take toward building a healthy self-image
is for you to take a good public-speaking course. The ability to express
yourself on your feet is one of the greatest confidence-builders known to
man. Chances are excellent your church, community college, or school
offers such a course. Ziglar Training Systems offers Effective Business
Presentations, Born to Win, Strategies for Success, and our I CAN course,
which is presently distributed by The Alexander Group.5 Toastmasters and
the Dale Carnegie courses are both excellent image-builders.
Another surefire step in building a good self-image is to become an
expert, a real pro, in your chosen profession of selling. A quick count will
reveal well over one hundred closes in this book. Learn those that
specifically apply to you and your selling situation. Even more important
than learning them, live them. Make them a part of you. Adapt them for
your own use and you will feel a surge of confidence— your image will
improve because you know that in a sales situation the odds are great you
are going to come out “smelling like a rose.” With improved effectiveness
your love for selling will be even greater, because an important key to
maintaining a good attitude is to know what you are doing.

Make Certain the Neighborhood Is Safe
Perhaps this next example will bring to life for you the absolute necessity
of building your self-image if you really expect to build an outstanding
sales career. In this example I use real estate, but it could apply to any
product or salesperson who goes out after business.

Let’s assume you have a poor self-image. You’re out working your
“farm” or territory one morning when you see a for sale by owner sign in
the yard. You circle the block three times to make absolutely certain the
neighborhood is safe. (You should be careful, shouldn’t you?) You finally
decide the neighborhood is safe, so you knock on the door (timidly, I might
add). The homeowner comes to the door and you start your presentation.
After about two sentences she says, “Just a minute. Let me ask you a
question. Do you sell real estate? Just answer yes or no.”
You confess that you do sell real estate, so the homeowner says, “I’m just
not interested. I’m going to tell you the same thing I told the last two people
who came by here selling real estate. I’m going to sell this house myself. I
planted every bush, every shrub, every tree in this yard, and I’m not going
to give you thousands of dollars for selling my house when I know a lot
more about the house than you will ever know. Furthermore, I don’t want to
hear any more about it!” And she closes the door in your face.

Poor Image Is the Problem
Now remember, you’ve got a poor self-image. You don’t like you and
that homeowner sure doesn’t like you! Chances are a hundred to one you
will react with, “Poor little me! Nobody likes me!” So what do you do? You
do the only thing you can. You go to the coffee shop for a cup of coffee.
While you’re drinking the first cup, you realize what you really need is a
second cup. As you slowly drink that second cup of coffee, you come to
some “interesting” conclusions.
“Why didn’t I think about this before? It is so obvious! What I’ve got to
do is go back to the office, make all the telephone calls I need to make,
clean up all the details on my desk, handle all the correspondence, and do
all of my service work. After all, you just can’t sell with a bunch of nagging
details hanging over you. Monday morning I’ll get out there with a clean
mind and no nagging details so I’ll knock ’em dead! Besides, it’s already
Wednesday!”
Let me tell you something. Ninety-eight percent of the people who
procrastinate have image problems. They just don’t want to get out and face
the possible rejection every salesperson alive faces every time he makes a
call. People reject salesmen—desks don’t—so it’s safe to go hide behind

that desk, a golf club, or for that matter, another planning session. Don’t
misunderstand. I believe in planning and taking care of details, but after a
certain point (like eating alphabet soup in alphabetical order or
proofreading the Xerox copy) planning becomes an escape from action to
avoid rejection. If you’re overorganized, with more records on less business
than you should have, now is the time to take action.

Good Image Is the Solution
Now let’s look at this illustration under identical circumstances, but with
one important change. This time you have a good, healthy self-image. You
are in the same neighborhood and you see the for sale by owner sign in the
yard. So you go knock on the door. The same homeowner comes to the
door, and after a brief but unpleasant dialogue she closes the door in your
face.
This time, however, you respond because you have a good, healthy selfimage. You understand it’s the lady who has the problem; you are not
personally incapacitated. As a result, you go down the street and find a
prospect who does not have a problem!
I’m confident you’ve heard—maybe even made—the statement “He
makes me so mad” or “She makes me so mad.” Let’s set the record straight
on that one. As any psychologist will tell you, “You can’t stir soup unless
there’s soup in the pot.” Others don’t put “mad” in you, but if it’s there they
can stir it up, if you choose to let them. It’s up to you to decide whether or
not you are going to invite them to come in and tell you how to think, how
to act, and how to feel.

From My Sales Notebook
Let me share some personal experiences to emphasize the point that the
salesman’s self-image has a direct bearing on his sales success. As a young
salesman, when I was out knocking on doors, I would often have a prospect
in one house, another prospect next door, and yet another prospect twenty
miles down the highway. I would make the call at the first house, and if I
were rejected by that prospect, I used an amazing ability I had. Let me
explain. As a young salesman I could actually look at the outside of a house
and tell you if it was the “right psychological moment” to make the call. In

my imagination I could see them eating lunch, taking a nap, having a
knock-down-drag-out fight, or 101 other things which I used to justify not
making the call on the prospect next door.
What would I do? Very simple. I’d get into my car and drive twenty
miles down the highway to see another prospect. How could I justify that?
Easy. I needed the driving time to “plan” what I was going to say when I
got there. (After all, I had been rejected on the previous call because I had
not properly “planned” what I said.) I was justifying the fact that I was
“working” during that twenty-mile drive.
The point is obvious and hopefully helpful. I had a poor self-image. I had
rejected myself. In my mind the prospect in the first house had rejected me,
and I wasn’t ready to go next door for another rejection. One more time.
Improve your self-image and you will improve your sales performance.

“They” Can’t Make You Feel Inferior—without Your
Permission
When your self-image is solid, you can go from one prospect to the next
many times, almost regardless of the reception you get. (I’ll be the first to
admit that everyone has a limit to the number of rejections he can handle.
That’s the reason I frequently make reference to building your self-image
and listening to cassette recordings and CDs regularly, especially after
being refused/rejected forcefully several times.)
As a salesperson it will help you enormously from an image point of
view to understand this paraphrase of what Eleanor Roosevelt said: Nobody
on the face of this earth can make you feel inferior without your permission.
Once you get your image right—and that’s what everything I write or
record is directly or indirectly aimed at doing—then your sales world and
your personal world will improve. The late Dr. Maxwell Maltz, plastic
surgeon and author of Psychocybernetics, said the purpose of all
psychotherapy is to build the self-esteem, that is, the image, of the patient.
Obviously, I’m not talking about a superinflated, “I AM THE
GREATEST” kind of self-image. (Actually, that’s the opposite of a healthy
self-image. The “I AM THE GREATEST” chest thumper is, in almost every
case, manifesting a poor self-image.) Most people think of that individual as

being conceited, which is a disease that makes everybody sick—except the
person who has it!
All great salespeople have strong (not inflated) egos. They cease to be
great when the ego has them!
I’m talking about a good, healthy self-image of self-acceptance. When
you can accept yourself, with your own faults and shortcomings, it’s much
easier for you to understand and communicate (I didn’t say agree) with
other people—including your prospects. Your self-image is important, so
build a good one and you will be able to build your sales career bigger,
better, and faster.
Regardless of where you are in your sales career, and regardless of what
your self-image might be at this moment, I believe as far as the sales
profession is concerned that I’ve walked in your shoes and felt your
feelings. I don’t believe any one of you who will ever read this, listen to a
tape, view a videotape of mine, or sit in a class I conduct has ever been
“broker,” “scareder,” more uncertain, more apprehensive, or more doubtful
about what tomorrow has to offer than I was. I don’t believe you have ever
been any further down in the dumps or did not like to make that initial
approach any more than me when I first entered the world of selling. I say
all of this to give you my personal assurance that there is hope for you.

11
Your Attitude toward Others
The third phase of attitude I wish to share with you is your attitude toward
others. How do you really view that person you’re dealing with across the
counter? Is he someone you can “make a buck” by selling to, or does he
represent a person with a problem which you can help solve? Are you really
thoughtful and considerate of him, or is your main focus on making the sale
and reaping the benefits for yourself?
In survey after survey around the country, the number one complaint
from customers is that of rudeness, inefficiency, or plain indifference. Two
of these obviously have to do with simple human relations, and if we do not
practice those, we’re not going to have any humans to relate to or sell to as
far as our place of business is concerned.
Cavett Robert used to point out that nearly three-fourths of the population
of the world goes to bed hungry every night. He also said that an even
higher percentage of people go to bed every night hungry for recognition.
Of considerable importance is the fact that every merchant and salesperson
recognizes the value of every person who walks into their place of business
or the importance of every prospect they deal with. Plain, simple courtesy
and thoughtfulness will go a long way toward improving your business and
building your sales career.
As a practical matter, I challenge you to observe the personal qualities
and characteristics of the top-performing men and women in the sales and
business world as well as the political and religious world. You will
discover that almost without exception they all adhere to the same
philosophy: Be nice.

How do you see your relationship with your prospect? Do you think of
yourself as a friend, as someone who truly can help and advise the other
person, someone who looks after the interests of the prospect? Do you buy
the idea that he profits most who serves best? I hope you do, because in the
world of selling the way to build customers is to build a winning
relationship with the people with whom you are dealing.
According to an Austin Business Journal article by Jill Griffin, the
average company in America loses a minimum of 20 percent of its
customers annually. Some companies, such as car dealerships and Internet
service providers, experience up to a 50 percent turnover. Griffin explained
that the best way to win the war on customer turnover is to ensure that the
customer never leaves in the first place. I contend this is done by building
winning relationships from the very first contact.
Everybody, including coaches, dentists, household executives, ministers,
builders, interior designers, etc., sells and everything is selling. With that in
mind, it simply makes sense to become a highly productive professional.
One interesting discovery by The Forum Corporation was that the high
performers were just as thorough in their sales-and-service approach with
members of the internal staff as they were with customers. Since
salespeople—even
high-performance
ones—generally
have
no
subordinates, they get their work done through others over whom they have
little or no direct control. They practice good human relations and sell the
support people at the home office on shipping, installing, servicing, and
generally just helping them (the high performers) please the customers. This
enables the high performer to keep his commitments to the customer and
demonstrates to the customer that he, the top performer, is a person who can
be trusted and is dependable.
This next little dissertation says it extremely well:
I’m Your Customer Who Never Comes Back
I’m a nice customer. All merchants know me. I’m the one who never complains no
matter what kind of service I get.
When I go to a store to buy something I don’t throw my weight around. I try to be
thoughtful of the other person. If I get a snooty clerk who gets nettled because I want to
look at several things before I make up my mind, I’m as polite as can be; I don’t believe
rudeness in return is the answer.

I never kick, complain, or criticize, and I wouldn’t dream of making a scene as I’ve
seen people doing in public places. No, I’m the nice customer, but I’m also the nice
customer who never comes back.
That’s my little revenge for being abused and taking whatever you hand out, because I
know I’m not coming back. This way doesn’t immediately relieve my feelings but in the
long run it’s far more satisfying than blowing my top.
In fact, a nice customer like myself, multiplied by others of my kind, can ruin a
business. And there are a lot of nice people just like me. When we get pushed far
enough, we go to another store where they appreciate nice customers.
He laughs best, they say, who laughs last. I laugh when I see you frantically
advertising to get me back, when you could have kept me in the first place with a few
kind words and a smile.
Your business might be in a different town and your situation might be “different,” but
if your business is bad, chances are good that if you will change your attitude the word
will get around and I’ll change from the nice customer who never comes back to the nice
customer who always comes back—and brings his friends.
Anonymous

Making a serious effort to keep our customer makes good economic
sense for two important reasons. According to Larry J. Rosenberg and John
A. Czepiel, writing in the March 1984 issue of The Journal of Consumer
Marketing, a lost customer reduces average company profits by $118
compared with a $20 cost to keep the customer satisfied. And those are
1984 figures! Imagine what the cost is today! Despite this fact, it is
estimated that the average company spends six times as much to get a new
customer as it does to hold a current one.
I might also add that if a customer leaves disgruntled, he will tell an
average of eleven other people about the problem. That can really be costly.
Incidentally, losers think in terms of “replacing” customers; winners
think in terms of maintaining customers and adding new ones in order to
build the business bigger and better.
Let me bluntly state if that is your attitude as you deal with your
prospect, you’re not going to sell or earn nearly as much. Earlier I
emphasized the point that selling is a “transference” of feeling. I also made
the point that your prospect picks up the feeling of greed and self-interest
and you ring up another “no sale.”
This story identifies the winning (you and the customer) attitude: Several
years ago, while bowling in Omaha, Nebraska, I injured my right knee. One
of my friends, whose elevator doesn’t quite reach the top, made some catty

reference to my age. My friend wasn’t overly bright or he would have
recognized that the left knee was exactly the same age as the right knee, and
it was in good shape, so obviously my age had no bearing on the condition
of my right knee!
Not long after I injured the knee, I was scheduled to speak in San
Francisco to about twenty-five hundred people. After the introduction, as I
came hobbling onstage, I could feel that audience thinking to themselves,
For goodness sake! Just look at Zig! Bless his heart, he’s all crippled up,
but I’ll bet he’s going to do the best he can. As a speaker I could feel the
feeling of the audience.
To be candid, I’ll have to confess that to this day I don’t quite understand
the therapeutic value of a microphone around the neck. Apparently there is
some medicinal value, because when they put that mike around my neck,
my knee quit hurting! For the next sixty-five minutes I was up and down,
around and about, stooping, squatting, shouting, whooping, hollering, and
doing all the things my audiences are accustomed to seeing me do. During
the entire sixty-five minutes, I never felt a pain. I finished making the talk,
stepped down off the stage, and the knee collapsed, causing me to fall.

Selling Is a Win-Win Situation
I daresay you know exactly what happened. For sixty-five minutes I was
not thinking about Ziglar and his knee. I was thinking about my prospects
and how I could help them solve their problems. I did not do this
consciously, but subconsciously. When I finished making the talk, I relaxed
inside. It was like I said to myself, “OK, Ziglar, you can forget about all
those people. Think about yourself.” When my thoughts turned inward
toward self instead of outward toward helping others, I fell flat on my face.
The same thing will happen to you. Don’t misunderstand. I’m highly
skeptical of people who adjust their halos and claim, “I sell my product just
because I love to help people.” (I notice that they always cash their
commission checks!) I hasten to add that I like to help people, too, but all of
us are alike in one respect. If our company quit paying us for selling, then
financial necessity would force us to quit helping people by selling our
products or services, regardless of the depth of our belief and regardless of
our love for what we do.

When you talk to a prospect, you ought to be wrapped up in solving his
problem, because in the process you will definitely be reaching your own
sales and career objectives. This attitude in selling definitely puts you and
your customer in a win-win situation.
To develop this attitude which leads to building a winning relationship
with your customer, let’s take a look at what DeMarco and Maginn of The
Forum Corporation discovered about how the customers of high performers
see the top producer and his role.

As King Customer Sees the Salesperson (Forum Report)
The customer sees the high-performing sales professional as a person
who is genuinely interested in the customer’s needs, even while he actively
promotes his or her company’s own position. This “balance” encourages
clients to share confidential information trustingly, knowing the sales
representative will try to understand his concerns and be fair in his dealings.
The customer sees the high performer as one who exchanges information
rather than as one who simply gives sales presentations from his
perspective.
The high performer is sensitive to the value of the customer’s time and is
able to spend more quality time in front of the customer because he spends
more quality time planning strategy and preparing for the call. Customers
perceive this and value it highly. He is aware of the personal pressures and
needs faced by the customer and sells to these people, not to companies.
One myth—that a salesperson should not get involved with customer
concerns other than the purpose of the sales call—was exploded, as was the
concept that price isn’t important and that you should “promise them
anything” to close a sale. Customers want and expect their salespeople to be
able to act as trustworthy resources who respond directly and provide them
expertise, backed by effective recommendations. One significant
characteristic of the high producer is his willingness to explain product
drawbacks.
To customers, the salesperson who is enthusiastic and interested in
working with them to solve problems rates as a more successful performer
than one who does not. A salesperson who builds relationships and provides
a valuable service, whether advice, information, or opinion, is

unequivocably considered a high performer by the customer and can
penetrate an organization at several levels. Customers feel the basic salesskills training prevalent in industry today needs to be continued. Product
knowledge, competitive knowledge, and the so-called face-to-face skills
(selling features/benefits, handling objections, etc.) are still prerequisites for
the sales job.
A word to the wise should be sufficient. If you listen to what the
customers of the top producers have to say, your chances of joining the
ranks of the top producers are greatly enhanced.

12
Your Attitude toward
the Sales Profession
Selling is the best-paying hard work and the lowest-paying easy work in the
world. For those who “get in selling” and then let selling “get in them,” the
sales profession offers an exciting, rewarding, and demanding career. What
the late Fred Herman titled his excellent book on selling is true: Selling Is
Simple (Not Easy). So let’s take a comprehensive look at this profession
which has been my life since I sold vegetables and milk door-to-door when
I was eight years old.
Large numbers of salespeople are enthusiastic about the product they sell.
They believe their company is the greatest and they’re pleased to be
affiliated with the people who represent the company. However, a high
percentage of these salespeople are hesitant to admit they sell for a living.
I’m going to make a big deal out of this point, because your total attitude
toward yourself—your prospects, your product, your company, and the
profession of selling—will often determine whether you make or miss the
sale. This is especially true on the close ones. Although this chapter will not
include any techniques in selling per se, it will be enormously helpful in
closing the close ones.

Be Proud You Sell
I’m proud to be a salesman for many reasons. I believe America is a great
nation because we are a nation of salespeople. America was discovered by a
salesman. Not by any stretch of the imagination could you accuse
Christopher Columbus of being a navigator. History records that he was
looking for a short route to India. He missed it by about twelve thousand

miles and still went back home and told them he had found it. Where I
come from, that’s not navigation.
You might say, “Well, that still doesn’t prove he was a salesman.” True,
but think about this: First of all, he was an Italian in Spain, so he was
speaking a foreign language. By most territorial assignments he was way
out of his sales territory. He had only one prospect to call on, so if he
missed the sale, he would have had a long swim home. To say the least,
that’s pressure selling!

The “Columbus” Close
He called on Isabella and told his story. After listening to his
presentation, Isabella said, “That sounds like a good idea, Chris, but twelve
thousand dollars for five little ships is ridiculous!” (Till this day many
people don’t realize they started with five ships—but two of them did go
over the side!) Columbus heard the money objection Isabella raised, but
since he heard what she said and what she was saying (page 96), he knew
that money wasn’t the problem.
He instantly recognized that she was not sold on all the advantages of
being the one to discover the short route to India. He knew she felt the cost
was greater than the benefit, and common sense dictated that neither
Isabella nor any other prospect would pay more for something than she felt
it was worth. With this in mind, Chris put on his sales shoes and started
painting pictures of all the good things that would happen to her nation and
the recognition she would get if she were responsible for discovering that
short route to India.

Columbus pointed out the colonization possibilities among the lands
which were sure to be discovered. He stressed the savings in time, the
possibilities of new and unknown foods, spices, gems, and furs.
Undoubtedly Chris reminded her that she would be able to spread the
Christian message to the “savages” beyond the horizon. I’m confident he
painted the picture of Spain’s getting a significant jump on France and
England in their competition for world domination.
When the factual/emotional sales presentation had ended and the decision
ball was in the air (a lot was at stake on this sales call, wasn’t it?), Isabella
said, “OK, Chris, I’m sold. The only problem is I don’t have any money.”
With this, Columbus looked at her and said, “Look, Izzy,” (since I was not
there, I’m not sure this is verbatim) “you’ve got that string of beads hanging
around your neck. Let’s take ’em down to the pawnshop and hock ’em and
we’ll finance this deal.”
Your history book will tell you they did have to use unusual methods to
raise the money to finance the trip. Once the voyage was under way,
Columbus still had to do a lot of selling. History records that the sailors
daily threatened to throw him overboard and sail back home. Since
Columbus was selling for his life, I’m confident his daily sales presentation
was heavy on the conviction side. Few salesmen in history have had the
need to be trusted as Columbus had. On a daily basis he had to sell in order
to sail. Then one morning the call came forth, “Land, ho!” And Christopher
Columbus had “landed” the most profitable sales call in history.

Tell Your Customers You Love Them
Then Christopher Columbus did what salespeople too often have a
tendency to do, and in the process he made the biggest mistake of his sales
career. He did not service the account. He apparently assumed that since it
was his idea and he had been the one to open such incredible opportunity
doors, he would be forever remembered—and rewarded.
If you have just started your sales career, I’d like to inform you that it
doesn’t work that way. If you’re an experienced pro in the sales world, I
hope I don’t need to remind you it doesn’t work that way. The reason is
competition, the majority of which is legitimate. Competitors are ever-

present and they are going to be wooing and courting your customers (you
do feel possessive, don’t you?) with their best foot forward at all times.
When you make the sale you are in the enviable position of being in the
driver’s seat, but when you take your eye off the road (the customer) and
your foot off the gas pedal (service), competition starts selling the idea they
are better drivers and have more and better gas.

Service—The Key to a Sales Career
In Columbus’s case, the “competition” was Amerigo Vespucci. He started
selling and servicing the account. Result: We did not become the United
States of Columbus; we became the United States of America, because
Columbus didn’t service the account.

The “Courtship” Close
I’m personally convinced this is often an important factor in the breakup
of many marriages. The guy and the gal put a sales story on each other
during the courtship (sales) process like you just flat cannot believe! All
during the courtship, each one is on his or her “best behavior” routine at all
times. Each one makes and honestly strives to keep commitments and
promises. Each one puts, and keeps, that best foot forward. He showers and
puts on all that good, masculine cologne, and she bathes and puts on that
sweet-smelling stuff. Each one is always prompt, always thoughtful and
considerate—until finally they talk each other into the trip down the aisle!

Now Things Change
Then they quit courting. Oh, they don’t quit the day after the honeymoon,
or even the week or month after, but over a period of time they gradually
start phasing out those thoughtful, loving, considerate little actions for each
other. They begin to abandon some of their good grooming habits. They
gradually fade away from the thoughtful, considerate, loving acts for each
other. They start letting other things and other activities enter into the
picture. Don’t misunderstand—I’m not implying that marriage can maintain
the same ecstasy the honeymoon did, but I do believe that courtship and
courtesy are absolute musts for the marriage not only to endure but to be
exciting and meaningful for each other as well.

We often hear of the “other man” or the “other woman.” Actually, there
would be no room for the other man or the other woman if the husband and
wife simply kept their priorities in order and continued to court each other
throughout their marriage. In short, our divorce rate would drop
dramatically if men and women “delivered” in marriage what they “sold”
while courting.
By the same token, I believe in most cases when we lose a customer to
competition it is not because of a better price or a better product, though
obviously that can enter the picture. In most cases it is because competition
came in and “courted” our customer as we had “courted” him before the
“marriage” (sale) with better service, more interest, more concern, and more
attentive listening to the needs of our customer.
To tie the sales and courtship examples together, someone rhetorically
asked, “When should you tell your wife you love her?” And the wit said,
“Before somebody else does!” When should you tell your customers you
love them? The same answer—before somebody else does! Then you
should demonstrate your sincerity by showing that love through service.
Columbus did not service the account, but that does not alter the fact that
we were discovered by a salesman and named after a salesman. We were
populated by a salesman. Sir Walter Raleigh toured the coffeehouses of
London selling those ignorant, fearful, superstitious people on the idea they
should leave the security of England and come into America where they
would have religious freedom and a chance to become landowners. Many
of them bought that idea, so America was at least partially populated by that
salesman.

George Was a Salesman
We were freed by a salesman. Do you fully realize what a tremendous
sales job George Washington did in gaining our independence? At that time,
America was almost equally divided into three factions. One-third of the
colonists wanted their independence, one-third wanted to stay with Britain,
and one-third said, “Look, George, whichever side wins is the one we’re
going to go with. During the conflict we’ll stay neutral, but when the danger
is past and the winner is established, we will throw in with that winner. You
can depend on our doing exactly that.”

George Washington had to get his recruits for the Continental army from
the farmers, merchants, backwoodsmen, seamen, laborers, and shipbuilders.
He had to be candid and say, “Gentlemen, if we win, I’m probably not
going to be able to pay you, and if we lose, you’ll be hung from the highest
tree as traitors.” Please remember that only one-third of the colonists
actually wanted independence and all of them knew that England had the
most powerful army and navy in the world. Yes, Washington’s recruiting
(sales) job was formidable.
I mention this again to let those of you who do any recruiting know that
your job is simple by comparison. Suppose you had to tell your prospective
recruits that every sales call they made would be on a prospect who had
never bought anything from anybody. Furthermore, even if they (the new
recruits) did make a sale, there would be no funds to pay them, but if they
missed the sale they would be shot at sunrise. Yup, George Washington was
quite a salesman!

Salespeople Are Important
We became an ocean-to-ocean nation and an international power as a
direct result of salespeople. Once we had won our independence, Alexander
Hamilton persuaded President Washington to petition Congress for an
appropriation so we could study the methods the British had used to set up
colonies and “agents” to merchandise their products and services around the
world. At this point, though we had been settled since 1608, in the ensuing
168 years we had made it only to the Appalachian Mountains.
With independence and the benefits of the knowledge acquired because
of the appropriation, we were moved to set up trading posts manned by
salesmen so that when settlers started moving westward they were able to
obtain gunpowder, blankets, and supplies. Because of these trading-post
salesmen, just thirty years after we won our independence, America had
made it all the way to the West Coast.

Salespeople Make the Difference
Yes, America is the greatest land on this earth because of the salespeople.
We definitely are not the greatest because of our size, because Canada,
Russia, and China are all larger than America. It is not because of our great

natural resources, though we have certainly been abundantly blessed in this
area. Realistically Russia, China, Canada, and other nations all have
tremendous natural resources.
It’s not because of our technological superiority, though we are
undoubtedly the number one nation in the world in that area. Still, the
Japanese, Germans, Swiss, Russians, and Israelis are our masters in some
areas of technological development. In my mind it is crystal clear. We’ve
been able to do what we’ve done because of salespeople and our free
enterprise structure and our freedom of religion.

Salespeople Are Secure
I suppose one of the reasons I’m so tremendously excited about the
profession is because of the security it offers. Should my own son come to
me and ask what I consider the most secure job in the world, I would
unhesitatingly say to him that it is a sales job. He, as well as you, might
well labor under the illusion that salespeople are the only people who work
entirely on commission. This illusion would naturally provoke the question
“Does this really offer security?”
The answer is yes, it does offer real security, and all jobs are commission
jobs. My executive assistant—and for that matter, every other person in our
society—is literally on commission. The salesperson and everybody else,
whether he receives a salary or is paid a commission, is working on
commission.
Eventually, regardless of what the job might be, if production is not
maintained, then the security of the job is taken away. So whether you are
on salary or commission, you are on commission even if you happen to be
the president of the United States. As you might have heard, if he doesn’t
do well, even he will lose his job. ’Nuff said.
The sales job offers security, and I remind you of that security with this
example. You might remember that back in 1981–82 we had a recession. At
that time there were literally tens of thousands of honest, sincere, dedicated,
conscientious, hardworking, productive people who lost their jobs. They
came from every walk of life—teachers and superintendents, airline pilots
and flight attendants, waitpersons and secretaries, lawyers, street sweepers,

and service people. They lost their jobs not because they were unwilling to
work, not because they did not have the ability, but because of the economy.
Here’s my challenge: Name one, just one, honest, sincere, dedicated,
conscientious, hardworking, productive salesperson who lost his job. If a
salesperson did lose his job for reasons beyond his control such as, for
example, his company’s going out of business, he could in most cases go
down the street—or even next door—and almost immediately gain
employment.

New Jobs Immediately Available
Never shall I forget an incident in Atlanta, Georgia, when I was
conducting a sales seminar. Just before the seminar started, two welldressed young men in their late twenties came and asked if they could get a
refund on their tickets. They explained that they had just lost their sales jobs
because of a personality conflict with their manager. Since they had no sales
jobs, to learn additional sales techniques would be of little or no value to
them (they obviously had momentarily lost perspective and did not realize
that they now—more than ever—needed their sales skills and training to
sell their way into another job).
I asked the two young salesmen two questions. Number one, “Do you
like to sell?” They both replied in the affirmative. Number two, “Would you
like another sales job?” They again replied in the affirmative. Then I
assured the two young men that before the evening was over I would have a
dozen interviews for sales jobs for them if they attended the session.
That evening when I reached this point in the presentation concerning the
security of the sales job, I asked the audience two questions. Number one,
“How many of you are in sales management?” Roughly one hundred of the
five hundred hands went up. Question number two, “How many of you
would be interested in interviewing two enthusiastic young salesmen who
present an excellent appearance and are sold on the profession of selling but
lost their jobs because of a personality conflict with their manager?”
Something like seventy-five hands went up. The two young men were able
to pick and choose from a dozen solid offers as to what they wanted to do.
Yes, selling is a secure profession.

General Douglas MacArthur defined security as the ability to
produce. As long as you can produce, my selling friend, you have
financial and career security.
Attitude Makes the Difference
The sales profession has a different attitude about life and business. In
the nonsales community, when business drops, management generally calls
a “pity party.” (That’s what Mrs. Mamie McCullough, the lady who started
the I CAN course for schools, named them. She also says many pity parties
are held on an individual basis.) To zero in on all the difficulties,
management explains they are going to have to cut the lights off early and
let a couple of the janitors, secretaries, and support personnel go. With a
stiff upper lip they explain that despite the fact things are tough, “We’re
going to fight this—and hope for the best.”
The sales world handles recessions differently. When the media
announces a recession, management gets everybody together and says, “We
know you’ve been hearing all about the recession, but we’ve figured out a
foolproof way to beat it. All we’ve got to do is reduce our sales.” Right?
Wrong!
What management does is simple. They call a management conference to
organize a sales meeting to end all sales meetings. The president, board
chairman, and sales manager are primed and rarin’ to go. They get the
troops together, roll out the red carpet, and in a highly excited manner say,
“Folks, we know all of you have been hearing the completely unfounded
rumor about a recession. Well, let me tell you what we think about
recessions. We think they are definitely between your ears! Recessions are
like a lot of other things. You can either join them or refuse to join. It is our
current company policy not to join.
“Let me tell you what we are going to do. We’re going to put on a contest
like you have never seen before in your life! We’re going to put up prizes
like you can’t believe. We’re going to offer incentives to our customers and
to you as salespeople which will make everybody so ecstatically happy and
excited that they’ll end up praying for any so-called recession to continue.
We’re going to embark on a promotion and advertising campaign that will

absolutely blow your mind! We’re going to get each one of you involved in
a sales training and a motivational program which will increase your
effectiveness and productivity dramatically. We’re going to sell more and
better than ever before.”

Think about This
Is this approach realistic? Is it effective? I’ll answer that with questions
for those of you who have been in sales since 1990 or before. Did you make
more money in 1991 than you did in 1990? Did you make more money in
1992 than you did in 1991? (Remember now, those were “recession” years.)
Are you making more money now than you’ve ever made before in the
world of selling? (Author’s note: I’ve been asking those questions in front
of my live audiences since 1976, which followed the recessions of 1974–75
and 1980–82, and I can tell you there is always a substantial number who
are doing better and better, regardless of the national market.)
It’s true: If our thinking is stinking, our business is going to be in the
same shape. Keep your thinking right and your business will be right.
The beautiful thing about selling is that it’s a democracy. In most cases
your company doesn’t care whether you’re male or female, black or white,
tall or short, fat or slim, old or young, introverted or extroverted, or even
educated or uneducated. The only thing the company cares about, in most
cases, is your integrity and your productivity. (There will be some
exceptions in the area of education for some highly technical industries.)
You’re recognized, paid, and rewarded based on what you—the individual
—do.

Good Morning, Mr. Chairman
When you get up in the morning and look in the mirror, you’re looking
directly into the eyes of your chairman of the board, your president, your
secretary-treasurer, and your janitor. You can now make a motivational
speech to your entire staff. “You’re such a nice guy,” or “You’re such a nice
girl. You deserve a raise,” and the board just met! As Cavett Robert loved to
say, “The raise is going to become effective just as soon as you do!” That’s
what I like about the profession of selling.

I’m always amused when presidential candidates debate about who is
going to run this country. I say this because the salespeople of America
control the economy of this country. Just in case you question the validity
of that statement, read on.

Things Happen When You Sell
Have you, my selling friend, ever really given any thought to what
happens when you make a sale? First of all, you make a profit, your
manager makes a profit, and if you’re lucky, your company makes a profit.
That way it can stay in business and you can keep on selling.
To paraphrase Samuel Gompers, one of the founders of the labor
movement, “The first responsibility of management is to make a profit,
because if you don’t make a profit then the company will go out of
business. If that happens, the workers not only won’t get a raise, they won’t
even have jobs! Your company must make a profit because when they do,
everyone benefits.”
I’d like to briefly trace what happens when you make a sale. To start the
process, you write the order or agreement on a piece of paper. That piece of
paper started out as a tree, not as a piece of paper. Somebody had to go out
in the woods and cut the tree down. You are the person who paid those
people to go into the woods and cut the tree down when you made that sale.
Many people were involved in hauling that tree to the paper mill. You’re
the person who paid those people to haul that tree to the paper mill when
you got out there and made the sale. In the paper mill there are hundreds of
people involved in manufacturing that tree into paper. You’re the person
who paid those people to manufacture that tree into paper when you made
that sale, but it goes much further than that.

Lots of People Benefit
You take part of your profits, go to the grocery store, and buy a can of
beans. The grocery man in essence says, “If you’re going to buy my beans,
I’ve got to get some more,” so he goes to the wholesaler and buys more
beans. The wholesaler keeps the ball rolling by saying, “If you’re going to
buy my beans, I’ve got to get some more,” so he goes to the cannery and
buys more beans. The cannery needs more beans, so the manager goes to

the farmer and buys more beans. This depletes the farmer’s supplies, which
means he’s got to raise more beans. The farmer has a problem because he
has worn out his tractor raising beans. Down to the tractor dealer he goes to
buy that new tractor. Since the dealer only has one tractor, he has to go to
the tractor factory to get more tractors.
When the dealer placed his order for more tractors, the tractor-factory
manager said, “If you’re going to buy more tractors, we will have to
manufacture some more, because you are taking all our inventory. In order
to manufacture more tractors, we have to bring in iron, copper, plastic, steel,
aluminum, zinc, lead, spark plugs, and rubber tires. We will also have to
give out over one hundred subcontracts for the parts we don’t manufacture
ourselves.” All those events, all those sales, and all those jobs were created
because one day you, my selling friend, got out and made a sale!

Salespeople Make It Happen
If anybody should make a negative comment or a belittling statement
about the sales profession, you should look that person in the eye and
earnestly say, “Friend, you are earning as much money as you are because I
and thousands of others are in the sales profession.” This is true whether
that person is a postman or a postmistress, a private or a general, a teacher
or a superintendent. Our standard of living is high because of the free
enterprise system, and the salesperson is the heart and soul of that system.
Several years ago the secretary of commerce of the United States said
that what we need in our country today is one million more professional
salespeople. The reason he made the statement is obvious. When the
salesman sells, the wheels of industry turn. OK, I plead guilty to being
prejudiced about this magnificent profession of selling, but let me give you
some historical data. I believe this will encourage you in the profession and
help to get you more excited about selling, which will be helpful in your
career. To do this, let’s take a good look at the nation of Cuba.
When Castro took over, nothing was rationed, nothing was in short
supply, salesmen were all over the island, and Cuba was completely selfsufficient as a nation. Today, no salesmen are there. Virtually everything is
rationed and many things cannot be bought at any price. To my observation
that there are very few salesmen on the island, some people might say,

“Well, Zig, if you don’t have surplus, you sure don’t need salesmen.”
Interestingly enough, however, when they had the salesmen they had the
surplus. The reason is simple. Salespeople create jobs and opportunity.
They build industry and prosperity.

Salespeople Are Nice Folks
When the average person understands the role the salesperson plays, our
role as salespeople will be much easier. When you as a salesperson fully
understand the importance of the sales profession, you are going to be even
more excited about your role in the profession. As a group, we truly
represent the best of middle America. We have a high percentage of voters,
taxpayers, and churchgoers. Our rate of divorce is one of the lowest of all
professions and the rate of suicide is the lowest of any of the professions.
As a salesperson you are truly privileged to be part of a noble profession.
A natural question or thought on your part at this point could be, “If those
facts are true, then why do so many people have a negative image of the
salesperson?” In my opinion there are several reasons for this. In the early
days the advent of the less-than-professional hustler known as the “Yankee
peddler” gave the profession a bad name.
From that point many people got the idea that a “good” salesperson was a
person who made someone buy something he didn’t want or— even worse
—made him want something he really didn’t need. In the beginning, the
average buyer did not understand (many of them still do not) that a
professional salesperson is a counselor who identifies the prospect’s needs
and then fills those needs through his goods, products, or services.

The Abominable Monstrosity
Our problems were compounded when Arthur Miller wrote that
abominable monstrosity titled The Death of a Salesman. Not only did the
play enjoy a long run on Broadway, but incredibly enough they put it on
television—not once, not twice, but many, many times! Willy Loman, the
salesman and central character, was the epitome of a loser. “Professor”
Harold Hill of The Music Man is the consummate “con man” and received
nearly as much publicity as poor Willy. In the minds of millions of

Americans these two men represent the sales profession. Nothing could be
further from the truth!
As salespeople we need to be selling at least two items in addition to the
goods or services we sell. As a way of life, we need to sell free enterprise.
We also need to sell the workers and business owners who manufacture our
products that it really is in everybody’s best interests to put in a full eighthour day producing the finest-quality products at the best possible prices so
that salespeople can sell with even more confidence and solve even more
problems. The American public wants—even demands—the best product at
the best price so my family and yours will get the most benefits.

Security, Longevity, and Fulfillment
Career benefits for the professional salesperson are enormous. With the
possible exception of those in the ministry and symphony conductors,
salespeople have the longest active career of any of the professions. I
started before I was eight years old and expect to continue for many more
years.
Victor Christen of South Pasadena, California, was still going strong at
age ninety-four. He, at that point, had been selling automobiles for seventyeight years and was a top salesman for Colliau Chevrolet. Since his health
was good he didn’t even think of slowing down, much less retiring.
The exciting thing about the sales profession is that the longer you sell
the more effective you become. The mental gymnastics required in selling
will keep you mentally alert, and the longer you sell the more client loyalty
and hence residual income you create. Since your integrity is the most
important factor in building customer loyalty and career stability, the
practicality of a totally honest relationship becomes even more obvious.
When the salesperson establishes trust and rapport with his or her
customers, some magnificently beautiful things happen to that sales career.

You Can Get an Early Start
The wonderful thing about selling is that you can get such an early start
in the profession. Larry Hawes is a classic case. Larry got his Social
Security card at age ten, but at that point he’d already been selling for three
years. His mother had paid him off with candy to walk up and down the

sidewalk wearing a sandwich board in front of the lighting store she
managed. At age eleven he was getting two dollars per hour as a stock boy
at the store but couldn’t resist the temptation to sneak into the showroom
occasionally to sell a few lamps. During one of these ventures, he sold one
shopper a three-hundred-dollar brass lamp.
When Sandra Jennings opened her window-treatment shop called “The
Blind Spot,” specializing in ready-made and custom-made blinds, verticals,
and draperies, Larry was fourteen and his brother, Jay, was sixteen, but they
were the first salespeople she hired. The Blind Spot had seven employees
and sixteen-year-old Larry was the top salesperson, averaging fifty
thousand dollars a month in sales. Store manager Lois Sparks said, “You
can depend on Larry to get the job done and done right. He has the selfconfidence to sell well and very few of the customers realize Larry is only
sixteen because he appears and acts much older.”
Sandra Jennings is her entrepreneurial son’s biggest booster. “He’s
plugged into business,” she said of the youngest of her four children. “His
sixth sense tells him not to let a single customer get away. He’s a fast
learner, pays attention to everything around him, and loves people. He’s
incredibly curious and he’s done everything—measured windows, installed
blinds and drapes, etc.”
“Selling isn’t difficult,” according to Larry. “It’s really very easy when
you know your product and have a purpose. People come into the store
either to price, buy, or compare brands and styles. My job is to show them
everything so they’ll walk away feeling confident in The Blind Spot, and in
their final selection.”
Larry is a young man with a very definite purpose. “I want to be rich,” he
says, with great seriousness. “I’d like to be a private investor, buy and sell
homes for investment purposes, stocks, oil, own a string of businesses,
maybe a department store and chain of restaurants. Working is an upper to
me, and I feel incredible after I make a good sale. This is especially true on
a Saturday when everybody’s working extra hard to reach a particular sales
goal.” Larry doesn’t describe himself as a workaholic, but he does always
want to meet or beat the goals he has set and the challenge and excitement
of selling are important factors in his work.

As I say, that’s one of the beautiful things about selling—you can start
with little or no investment, at a very early age, and work as long as you
wish.
Because of Victor Christen, who was still going strong at ninety-four, and
Larry Hawes, who started at age seven, as well as all the salespeople
between seven and ninety-four, I’m sold on selling as a career.
If a young man or woman were to ask me what I would suggest as a
career which offered the greatest opportunity for personal fulfillment and
security while making a significant contribution to society, I could honestly
say, “I don’t know of a finer profession than the profession of selling.”
Select a product or service that solves problems and in which you
completely believe. Make certain the company is morally and financially
sound. Become a sales professional and commit yourself to a 100 percent
effort and I’ll guarantee you can write your own ticket in the world of
selling. Be proud that you sell! The profession of selling is a proud
profession. When your attitude reaches the point that you can look with
complete pride at your product, your company, and the service you sell, as
well as the profession of selling, when you see the sales profession as a
truly glorious one, then you will close more of the close ones. You’ll be
building a career, which means you will win big now and win bigger later
on.
I Am a Salesman
I am proud to be a salesman because more than any other man I, and millions of others
like me, built America.
The man who builds a better mousetrap—or a better anything—would starve to death
if he waited for people to beat a pathway to his door. Regardless of how good, or how
needed, the product or service might be, it has to be sold.
Eli Whitney was laughed at when he showed his cotton gin. Edison had to install his
electric light free of charge in an office building before anyone would even look at it.
The first sewing machine was smashed to pieces by a Boston mob. People scoffed at the
idea of railroads. They thought that even traveling thirty miles an hour would stop the
circulation of the blood! McCormick strived for fourteen years to get people to use his
reaper. Westinghouse was considered a fool for stating that he could stop a train with
wind. Morse had to plead before ten Congresses before they would even look at his
telegraph.
The public didn’t go around demanding these things; they had to be sold!

They needed thousands of salesmen, trailblazers, pioneers, people who could persuade
with the same effectiveness as the inventor could invent. Salesmen took these inventions,
sold the public on what these products could do, taught customers how to use them, and
then taught businessmen how to make a profit from them.
As a salesman I’ve done more to make America what it is today than any other person
you know. I was just as vital in your great-great-grandfather’s day as I am in yours, and
I’ll be just as vital in your great-great-grandson’s day. I have educated more people;
created more jobs; taken more drudgery from the laborer’s work; given more profits to
businessmen; and have given more people a fuller and richer life than anyone in history.
I’ve dragged prices down, pushed quality up, and made it possible for you to enjoy the
comforts and luxuries of automobiles, radios, electric refrigerators, televisions, and airconditioned homes and buildings. I’ve healed the sick, given security to the aged, and
put thousands of young men and women through college. I’ve made it possible for
inventors to invent, for factories to hum, and for ships to sail the seven seas.
How much money you find in your pay envelope next week, and whether in the future
you will enjoy the luxuries of prefabricated homes, stratospheric flying airplanes, and a
new world of jet propulsion and atomic power, depends on me. The loaf of bread that
you bought today was on a baker’s shelf because I made certain that a farmer’s wheat
got to a mill, that the mill made the wheat into flour, and that the flour was delivered to
your baker.
Without me the wheels of industry would come to a grinding halt. And with that, jobs,
marriages, politics, and freedom of thought would be a thing of the past. I AM A
SALESMAN and I’m both proud and grateful that as such I serve my family, my fellow
man, and my country.
Author Unknown

Yes, the salesperson and the sales profession are both vitally important to
the growth and stability of a free and even greater America.

Good News
Fortunately, the winds of change are blowing in the salesman’s direction.
Here’s what Allan Cox, author of “The Cox Report on the American
Corporation,” had to say in a copyrighted interview in the magazine U.S.
News & World Report:
The loss of status of the salesman symbolizes the distance between corporations and
consumers. In the early history of American business, the heads of manufacturing and
sales were the twin heroes. Then the salesman lost status even though he was and
remains the link between the customer and the company. I see this trend starting to
change and expect a revival in status for those in marketing and sales. We are learning
that we have to get back to the customer we have neglected.
Soon a different kind of chief executive officer will rise to the head of the corporation,
someone with his ear to the ground, not the exclusively financially oriented individual
who tended to be king between 1965 and 1980. The new breed will be more marketing
oriented, in touch with public sentiment and more sensitive to issues of social

responsibility. As corporations begin to realize that society and the marketplace are one
and the same, they will become more idea oriented and we will see the re-emergence of
American business.

P.S.: One reason sales and marketing people will return to the chief
executive’s chair is business has finally learned that selling is the only thing
that contributes to profit. Everything else contributes to cost.

13
Building Physical “Reserves”
in Selling
To repeat what I said in an earlier chapter, the most important part of the
sales process is the salesperson. For that reason, I deal with the role the
salesman plays as well as why and how you must build a physical, a
spiritual, and a mental reserve. Most of the remaining space in this segment
will be devoted to the mental aspects of building a knowledge reserve, but
first let’s look at the physical reserve, which can be enormously helpful in
your sales career.

Exercise to Build Physical Reserves
Evidence is overwhelming that you must be in good physical condition if
you’re going to function at your best in any profession, including selling.
For example, psychologists tell me that when I speak an hour I burn more
raw energy than a laboring man does in an eight-hour day. (I speak at about
280 words per minute with gusts up to 550.) When I do a four-hour session,
I’ve got to be in good physical condition because the audience (my
customers) expects me to be just as enthusiastic and energetic the last few
minutes as I was the first few minutes. They paid their money to come hear
me and they deserve to hear me at my best for the entire session. I feel a
strong moral obligation to be physically ready to perform at my mental and
emotional best. That’s the only way I can “sell” them the ideas, procedures,
and techniques which will make them more effective in the sales world or
in life in general.
Frankly, my selling friend, you have the same moral obligation to your
customers. (We’ve already decided the customer is the big winner, so we

owe it to him to be in good condition to help him win.) You need to be just
as enthusiastic with the last prospect you talk to every day as you are with
the first one. This is true whether you went out to see him or he came into
your store to see you. Each one deserves you at your very best. The last
prospect you call on each day has the same basic needs as the first one you
called on. You owe it to every prospect to be in the best physical condition
possible so you can serve each one best. Obviously, age and physical
handicaps are important factors, but you should develop your sales
“muscles” so you can give every prospect an honest shot with an energized
presentation so he will have the complete story, enthusiastically presented,
to make his decision.
There are many books and methods for getting in shape and then
maintaining good physical condition. My favorite is The Aerobics Program
for Total Well-Being by Dr. Kenneth Cooper. I jogged for nineteen years,
but Dr. Cooper’s latest research reveals that over the long haul fast walking
is even better. In my case I find fast walking the most practical method for
staying in shape, since I travel a great deal and can walk just about
anywhere regardless of the weather. I’ve walked during torrential
downpours and with the temperature as much as forty degrees below zero.
(Don’t misunderstand—the rain and cold were outside. I was walking
inside!)
Since I can’t measure my walking distance when I’m traveling, I walk by
the clock. I normally walk about sixty minutes, five days each week. Until I
started my jogging my basic approach to exercise was to fill the tub, take a
bath, pull the plug, and fight the current! (Realistically, that isn’t much of an
exercise program.)
In addition to exercise we also need to eat nutritious, well-balanced
meals and get a reasonable amount of sleep. If you had a multimilliondollar racehorse, you wouldn’t let him stay up half the night smoking
cigarettes, drinking coffee or booze, and eating junk food, would you? You
would feed him the right food and drink, and control his rest and exercise to
give him a chance to perform like the Thoroughbred he is, wouldn’t you?
Since you, too, are a thoroughbred with a billion-dollar body who wants
to be a winner, don’t you think that you deserve the same treatment so you
will have a legitimate chance to win? Additionally, when you take care of

your body, your mind is more alert and productive. As Vince Lombardi
said, “Fatigue makes cowards of us all.”
By being in excellent physical condition you will have the energy and
motivation to make that one more call toward the end of the day. This is the
one which makes such an enormous difference in your career. If you are
physically and mentally—as well as emotionally—geared to give your best
effort to the very end, you’re far more likely to make that sale. You will
have the extra edge in enthusiastically using one more close and making
one more effort to make one more step which will take you to the top of the
sales heap and help your client in the process.
The tired salesperson at the end of the day has a tendency to rationalize
away his chances for being a sales champion. If he’s had a superb day, he’s
inclined to reason, “After all, I’m not greedy. I have had a good day. Why
press my luck? By quitting early I can get a good night’s rest and be sharp
for tomorrow.” If he’s had a lousy day and he’s tired, then he’s inclined to
say, “The way things are going, no wonder I can’t sell! It’ll be far better for
me to call it quits today and get a fresh start tomorrow so I’ll be sharp.”
The successful sales pro will tell you there is nothing that will get you
ready for tomorrow like making a sale on that last call today. Often the last
sale is the one you are doubly proud of because it represents that “extra
effort” you’ve heard so much about. Emotionally it really gets you ready
and excited about the next day, so instead of being a reluctant starter the
next morning, you start the new day like a tiger.
Another factor is involved here, too. According to Dr. William James, the
father of American psychology, we have not only a second wind but a third,
fourth, fifth, sixth, and even seventh wind. Sometimes after you think
you’ve given it your best, as you make that last call the excitement of the
effort gets to you and you feel a renewed burst of energy, excitement, and
enthusiasm, and the last call turns out to be the most productive one.
Here’s another, very practical, intelligently selfish reason for staying in
good physical condition so you will be as enthusiastically effective the last
hour of the day as you were the first hour. Insurance salesmen often say that
part of what you earn should be your very own to keep and use as you see
fit. You and I both agree with that statement, but as a practical matter, you

probably spend the first six or seven hours every day working for
everybody except yourself. You pay the grocer, the landlord, the utilities
company, the service station, the insurance people, the government, the
laundry, the clothier, and all the others, but not yourself. Now wouldn’t it be
a shame to go top speed all day until the last hour so that you can pay
everybody else and then run out of steam when you start working for
yourself?
From personal experience I can tell you that for every minute I invest in
my exercise program, I get three to five minutes of full-speed-ahead
productivity. Frankly, I have so much to do I don’t have time not to
exercise. Take care of your health and that last hour of productivity will not
only be your best hour but it will also be yours (the money—the satisfaction
—the recognition).
All of that is to say, my selling friend, get in shape physically, mentally,
spiritually, and emotionally so you can give it your best. That’s the only
way you’re going to get the best—or championship—results.
Time: Manage It—or Squander It. Sales trainer Don Hutson points out
that a study done by S.M.E. International revealed that the second leading
cause of failure in the sales profession was the improper utilization of time.
Mark Gardner, whose basis of opinion comes from his time spent as an
assistant vice-president with E. F. Hutton and Co., Inc., is of the opinion
that the average securities broker spends less than two hours each day in the
actual process of selling new or established customers. There are two,
possibly three, major reasons for this. First would be a disregard for, or lack
of expertise in, the field of time management. Second could be a shortage of
energy which causes the salesperson to start the day late, end it early, and
go at substantially less than full speed during the day or week.
The third reason could be called reluctance because of a shortage of
confidence, a poor self-image, or a bad case of “stinkin’ thinkin’.” With the
exception of time management, we are dealing with these problems by
offering positive solutions. Most time-management problems are caused by
poor habits and lack of direction. The others are caused by lack of
knowledge and expertise.

It is safe to say that the professional closer, almost without exception, is a
time miser. He knows payday comes only when he is in front of a prospect,
so he handles the necessary details of his profession during those times
when he cannot be in front of the prospect. Acquiring the knowledge and
staying in shape will put you in front of your prospects at least one more
hour every day. That hour has a huge impact on the bottom line of your
financial statement.
One additional way to improve that bottom line is to have your own
personal “booster” week on a quarterly, semiannual, or annual basis. A
“booster” week is a total-effort week during which you give your maximum
effort from early in the morning until late at night. You plan it for weeks in
advance so that nothing interferes with a total effort on your part to spend
every possible moment that week in front of prospects who can make
buying decisions. Never will I forget my first booster week after I really got
started in the cookware business. The company started promoting it
casually about six months in advance and gradually built the tempo until it
reached its peak for the scheduled week with one solid “get ready” week to
pick up momentum for the major thrust.
For the big week we booked our dinner demonstrations three weeks in
advance. We gave extra incentives to our hostesses for having extra couples
at their dinners. We booked pancake calls for breakfast starting at 6:00 a.m.
It was a busy week. That week I conducted full demonstrations for thirtynine couples and sold thirty-one sets of cookware. That week had a solid
impact on my sales career. My confidence increased substantially as I
revised my goals upward.
Total-effort weeks require tremendous physical effort, so again your
physical condition is important. You might also consider involving the
family in your booster week and the week after. Ask your family to do
everything possible to remove all your normal responsibilities that week so
you can concentrate on selling. Then for the next week plan something
extra for the whole family, maybe a short vacation together so you can
spend all of your time with them. Personal booster weeks can be good for
you, good for your company, and good for your family.

Smoking on Calls Is a No-No!

Since smoking and drinking are both detrimental to our health and are
enormously expensive, I personally don’t participate in either, but since this
book’s primary purpose is to help you close more sales, I’ll confine my
comments to the fact that if you want to sell more merchandise, you will
neither smoke nor drink on sales calls.
First, let’s look at smoking. Even if your prospect is smoking and offers
you one, you should turn it down. The reason is simple. It takes time to
light the cigarette, a place to put the ashes, and then time to put out the
cigarette. Sometime between January 1 and December 31, smoking will
cost you some sales. I don’t know which ones, nor do I know how many,
but based on conversations with hundreds of customers, smoking costs you
a lot more than the price of the cigarette. The word is, if you are serious
about building your career as fast and solidly as possible, don’t smoke and
sell at the same time.

What about Drinking with a Prospect?
Many times I’m directly challenged with, “Don’t you think it’s all right
to have a cocktail with your prospects while you talk shop?” My answer is
always the same: “Nope, sure don’t.” Question: Suppose the prospect offers
you one? The answer is still no. The questioner often persists, “So what do
you say?” (For some reason the inquirer doesn’t seem to understand that no
is an answer! And that “No, thank you” is a courteous answer when the
prospect insists that you join him in a cocktail.)
On November 26, 1972, I took my last drink, and since that day less than
a dozen people have insisted or offered it the second time. On the second
offer, I quietly say, “No, I really don’t drink.” Would you believe that about
half of them reply, “Boy, I wish I didn’t!”?
I did not lose a friend or a sale and I don’t think they respected me any
less. As a matter of fact, I believe in most cases they were possibly a little
envious and even wished they, too, did not drink. I believe, although this
was not my primary objective, that my standing actually improved with
most of the individuals. I’m completely convinced that any sales it might
have cost me were far more than replaced by the sales I gained.
Your question: “Zig, what am I going to do? Have a Coke?” Not
necessarily. From time to time I think you ought to have Pepsi, 7-Up, Dr

Pepper, or any of a number of other soft drinks.

Does a Cocktail Really “Sharpen You Up”?
Many times salesmen tell me, “I take a drink to be sociable and because
the drink ‘sharpens me up.’ I really feel I gain a mental pickup.” My
comment: “If a cocktail sharpens you up, you’ve got to face the fact that it
does the same thing for your prospect, so you still haven’t gained any
advantage.” Unfortunately, many times the salesmen who say a drink
sharpens them up actually think they believe what they say.
I say they think they believe the drink sharpens them up because they’ve
never really thought about it. An honest answer to this next question will
remove that thought from your mind. Here’s the situation: If you think a
drink sharpens you up, you obviously believe it does the same thing for
others. You’re facing a major operation and you want the surgeon to be at
his sharpest best. Question: Are you going to insist that he take a little nip
just before he opens you up?
The point is clear. Don’t take a drink when you’re trying to persuade
someone to take action. You’re likely to get complacent, lose the mental
sharpness, and lose the sale. Liquor is a depressant, not a stimulant.

Build a Spiritual Reserve
To enjoy a balanced success in selling and in life, we need to build a
spiritual reserve. I say this without apology or hesitation despite the fact
some people feel you shouldn’t talk about religion and politics in business.
I’ve weighed my position and that advice many times and have come to the
same conclusion which evangelist James Robison clearly states, namely,
that religion and politics are the two most important things in our lives, and
if we don’t choose to talk about them, the day will come when we will no
longer have that choice. I’m not going to go into any theological discussion,
nor will I devote more than a couple of paragraphs to the subject (I
elaborate in my book Confessions of a Happy Christian), but I do feel that
it’s important for you to know where I’m coming from.
If I had never read the Bible or heard a preacher preach, and had only
been dealing with young people on drugs, I would have a deep and total
faith. I’ve seen hundreds of youngsters come into drug-rehabilitation

programs so strung out on drugs they did not know one day from the next.
They had been to psychiatrists and psychologists; they’d been in group
therapy and under the care of competent professionals, with minimal
results. Once these young addicts enter a program which follows the basic
concept of Alcoholics Anonymous, good things start to happen.

This Way Out
In simple terms, here is the concept the addicts follow: First, recognize
you’ve got a problem. Second, understand there’s nothing you can do about
it yourself. Third, accept the fact that you’ve got to have a Source of help
greater than any human being can provide—God, as you understand Him.
(In my own case, I’m privileged to say Jesus Christ as I know Him.) The
addicts are forced to accept the fact there is something greater than man,
and they need to look to that greater force.
I don’t know who you are as a reader, but whoever you are, wherever you
live, whatever you do, I can say this to you. If it hasn’t already happened in
the past, it will in the future. You’re going to have difficulty of some kind
which neither you nor any other human being can handle. That’s why a
spiritual reserve is so marvelous and helpful in selling and even more
marvelous in life.
What does this have to do with closing sales? Everything, friend. If you
are in trouble and have deep personal problems, whether they are of a
physical, family, mental, social, financial, spiritual, or career nature, you are
going to be primarily thinking about solving your own problems and not
solving your prospect’s problems. One more time, the most important part
of the sales process is the salesperson. And the most effective salesperson is
the one who is balanced physically, mentally, and spiritually.
The Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company conducted a
comprehensive study involving thousands of people and in excess of
1,500,000 pieces of information. They uncovered some interesting and
exciting things, including the fact that the three groups in America with the
highest moral values were (1) the clergy, (2) businessmen, and (3) the
general public.
As a businessman, that information pleased me a great deal, but there is
more. The study revealed that people with deep religious convictions are

the most productive employees. Here’s why. Ninety-seven percent of those
who had made strong spiritual commitments carried that feeling of
conviction, commitment, and loyalty to their employers with highly
productive results. Not surprisingly, this parallels a study involving over
22,000 students who qualified for “Who’s Who in American Schools and
Colleges.” Over 85 percent of these honor students said their faith in God
was extremely important to them.
Not only that but a study by The Heritage Foundation found that regular
worship service attendance reduces suicide, drug and alcohol abuse, crime,
out-of-wedlock births, and divorce. People who attended worship services
regularly were far happier and healthier, had a lower rate of depression,
higher self-esteem, longer and happier marriages, and better sex. It also
helps inner-city youth escape poverty. The family income difference of
those who attend worship services and those who don’t is $37,021 vs.
$24,361.
Question: Why are these workers and students more productive and why
will you, as a salesperson, be more productive if you have deep spiritual
beliefs and strong religious values? Answer: Humans are physical, mental,
and spiritual beings—and if you neglect any one of these facets, you will
not be a complete person. If you are hurting or empty in one aspect of your
life, it’s much tougher to be productive in the other areas. On the flip side, if
you have taken care of the physical, mental, and spiritual aspects of your
life, you can concentrate on the job at hand, which—in the world of selling
—is selling.

14
Building a Mental Reserve
in Selling
The third kind of reserve is mental reserve. I’m a fight fan and even fought
a couple of years in the ring. I fought just long enough to know that if I ever
have any disagreements with anybody, I guarantee you that all I’m going to
do is just talk about that disagreement.
I love the story of Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney. When Gene Tunney
retained the heavyweight championship in his fight with Jack Dempsey, he
did so because he had trained by running backwards. Gene Tunney was
anything but a coward, but he knew when he got back into the ring with
Dempsey he was going to be hit and probably hurt.

Backing Up to Go Forward
Since Gene Tunney knew he would get hit and hurt in the rematch with
Jack Dempsey, he decided to prepare for it. He did this by running
backwards while doing his roadwork. When his sparring partner clobbered
him, he diligently trained himself to back away. He did this many, many
times. In my own limited ring experience I learned that when a fighter is hit
and hurt, he instinctively tries to “git ’im!” (his opponent). At that specific
moment he’s less capable of “gittin’ him” than at any other time. That’s
when he gets his platter cleaned and is often knocked out.
Tunney knew that when he got hit by Dempsey he could be stunned, go
on the attack, and possibly get knocked out, so he conditioned himself to
avoid this by running backwards. You fight fans probably remember that in
the second fight Dempsey knocked Tunney down for that famous long
count. Later, Tunney said his head was perfectly clear and he could have

gotten up and gone back to war, but instead of doing that he remembered
his training.
Every fighter who has ever been hurt always says, “I’m OK, I’m OK,
lemme at ’im!” I’ve seen guys who were so out of it they couldn’t tell you
what city they were in, but they were telling the referee they were OK!
Tunney “responded” to his training instead of “reacting” when Dempsey
knocked him down. He backed away and fought a holding/delaying action
until his head cleared. In the next round he knocked Dempsey down and
won the fight going away.

You Will Be Rejected
What does this have to do with you and building your sales career? A lot.
Every day you go out to see prospects or prospects come in to see you. On
occasion you can anticipate or expect to be “stunned” by firm rejections and
caustic comments from prospects. It is an occupational hazard. Question:
Why not build up a mental reserve so when you are rebuffed in any way by
your prospect you are mentally prepared to handle the incident? Positive
mental preparation in advance will help absorb the impact of dealing with
negative experiences.

Positive Steps to Overcome Negative Input
By the same token, I’m going to tell you this as a positive fact: You’re
going to have negative poison dumped into your mind and emotions every
day of your sales life. Events, people, radio, newspapers, and television all
participate in the process. Combine this with the fact that in the world of
selling, whether you go out to see prospects or the prospects come in to see
you, a certain percentage of them will deal with you in a negative manner.
To be at your most effective best in the sales profession, you need to
build a substantial mental reserve. This mental reserve of knowledge and
right attitude will make a real difference in virtually every sales encounter.
The difference will be especially significant to your sales career when you
are dealing with the close or borderline cases in which the slightest
variation in your attitude and knowledge reserve will gain or lose the sale.
Generally speaking, all things being equal, the prospect will buy from the
salesperson he likes. However, as John M. Wilson points out in his book

Open the Mind and Close the Sale, things are not equal when one
salesperson has more knowledge and enthusiasm about the product he sells
than a competing salesperson has about the product he sells.
You build your mental reserve by reading good books, by listening to
motivational and sales training recordings, and by attending professional
training sessions and your own company meetings. This really boils down
to daily feeding your mind with good, clean, pure, positive input.
I also urge you to join and actively support your SMEI Club (Sales and
Marketing Executives International) for sales managers and marketing
managers (mailing address, P.O. Box 1390, Sumas, WA 98295-1390;
phone, 312-893-0751).

For Professionals the CD Player/Cassette Player Is a Must
In chapter 5, we discussed the value of recording your presentation on a
cassette recorder to make certain you are saying the right words and using
the right voice inflection. Now I would like to emphasize the value of a
cassette or CD player for you to use in your home and in your car. If you are
in the world of selling and do not have your own cassette or CD player, you
are not really serious about selling. I’m completely convinced, based on
literally thousands of letters and individual discussions, that the use of a
cassette or CD player can increase your sales effectiveness to the degree
that it will be worth many thousands of dollars each year in additional
income.
The beautiful thing about listening to training and inspirational
recordings is the fact that your time investment is almost zero. Ideally, you
can listen to recordings as you begin the day, ironing, making the bed,
shaving, applying makeup, and dressing, and your mind is not otherwise
engaged. You can listen to the recordings in the evening as you are
preparing for bed. You can listen as you go from one call to the next.
Between those calls you can often pick up an idea or a motivational lift
which further prepares you for the next call. Over the years I have had
thousands of salespeople tell me this procedure was the most important
process they followed in order to stay mentally ready to sell. In appliance,
furniture, luggage, and other specialty shops you can listen during slow

times and keep your attitude right while depositing sales information and
inspiration in your knowledge bank.
According to the University of Southern California, if you live in a
metropolitan area and drive twelve thousand miles each year, in three years’
time you can acquire the equivalent of two years of college education. You
can learn every phase of the sales profession from building the right mental
attitude to prospecting and handling objections, negotiations, closings, and
so on. By constantly feeding your mind via those cassette/CD recordings,
you can acquire considerable sales information plus a good feel for the
proper voice inflections, pauses, and procedures as demonstrated on the
recordings by the independent professional as well as company sales
trainers.
Most of the alternatives, as John Hammond suggests, offer one or more
negatives. You could listen to the news but much of that is negative. You
could listen to music but some of that is profane and violent or some sad
tale by a cowboy about how his best friend ran off with his horse, his
girlfriend, or his saddle. You could listen to call-in talk shows but much of
that is idle chatter. Even if the alternatives were not negative, while you are
in your car on the way to making a call, there is nothing as productive as
preparing mentally and emotionally for that call by listening to those
motivational/educational recordings.

Fringe Benefits Are Enormous
There are some fringe benefits from listening each day before you start
your day. Psychologists maintain the first person you meet or deal with
every day (of any significant nature) will have more emotional impact on
your attitude that day than the next five people you encounter. Every day
you should select a recording from a motivational speaker, sales trainer,
minister, or anyone who gives you a positive lift. Since the whole family is
involved in your success, get them together and listen to a few minutes of
positive material before you start the day.
In my mind, the most motivating single message you can listen to is
exciting music with positive lyrics. I don’t believe you could start a day
with songs like “God Bless the USA,” “Because He Lives,” “How Great
Thou Art,” “The Battle Hymn of the Republic,” the sound track to Rocky or

Chariots of Fire, or any truly great inspirational song, and not feel better for
the day.
If you did nothing more than place the CD player or cassette recorder in
the center of your house and turn it on, you would notice that every member
of your family would start “picking ’em up and putting ’em down” in a
happier, more excited way. Not only is inspiring motivational music
tremendously moving, but it very definitely affects your attitude. I firmly
believe if you will start the day by listening to a few inspirational songs,
you will be emotionally ready to deal with your prospects on a one-on-one
basis.
Incidentally, the wrong kind of music is tremendously demotivating and
can have a definite negative impact on you. I urge you to read Behavioral
Kinesiology by Dr. John Diamond to find out which music is good for you,
which is bad for you, and why.
Plant Good Seeds—Reap Positive Crops. To repeat myself, your mental
attitude is influenced tremendously by what goes into your mind. If you
want good “output,” you’ve got to have good “input.” If your thinking is
good, your business will be good. If you’ve got “B.O. of the brain,” better
known as “stinkin’ thinkin’,” your business is going to be in the same
shape. It’s true—if you’re going to build an outstanding career in the world
of selling, you’ve got to build your mental reserves so that, as Kipling said,
you can meet success and failure and treat both these “imposters” the same.

With Mental and Physical Reserves You Can Score
You’ve got to be able to score in the last few seconds of the first half and
the last few seconds of the ball game. The National Football League did a
study on scoring and discovered that in the last two minutes of the first half
and the final two minutes of the game, more points are scored than in any
other twenty minutes of the football game!
Why? I believe there are three reasons. Number one, the teams realize
that in most cases they need to score to get back in the game, to win, or to
secure a shaky lead. Number two, they practice the “two-minute drill” more
than any other phase of the game, so they are loaded with mental, physical,
and emotional reserve. Number three, their objectives are clearly defined.
They know what they’ve got to do, and because they have thoroughly

prepared, their confidence is high that they can reach the objective, which is
to score. This results in a fantastic finish of the half or of the game.
The same principles and procedures apply to you in your sales career.
Build your reserves, get your thinking right, get your spiritual values in
order, get your body in good physical condition, and you will have taken
the key steps toward building an exciting and successful sales career. The
most exciting thing is the knowledge that every individual can do something
about these areas.

Building Customer Reserve
There is yet another reserve which truly outstanding salespeople will
build, and that is customer reserve in the form of testimonials from
customers. I remember the first real testimonial I saw not long after I
entered the world of selling. I lived in Columbia, South Carolina, and a big
divisional meeting was scheduled in Charlotte, North Carolina, for all the
salespeople in the Carolinas. One of the speakers that day was an old pro
named Ralph Beaver of Greensboro, North Carolina. Ralph was an
extraordinary showman who specialized in the spectacular.

The “Testimonial” Close
At the conclusion of his talk that day, Ralph pulled out a roll of addingmachine paper four inches wide. He held it up so we could see that
something had been typed on the paper. At this point Ralph dramatically
said, “Now, ladies and gentlemen, even after a spectacular demonstration
[he wasn’t overly modest] and a strong series of closes, I still occasionally
have prospects who say no.
“When that happens, I pull out this roll and say, ‘Mr. and Mrs. Prospect,
since there seems to be a little hesitancy on your part to go ahead and
reserve a set of our cookware, let me ask you a question. [With that he held
the end of the adding-machine roll as high as he could reach and let one end
go. As the roll of paper unwound the entire length of the room, Ralph
Beaver continued.] The names on that roll of paper are your friends and
neighbors who own the set of cookware you are looking at right now [he
had neatly typed the name and address of every customer he had sold
during his twenty years in the business.] Why don’t you see if you know

any of them?” (As the prospects got down on their knees to look, they
always recognized a number of names.)
Ralph: “Mr. and Mrs. Prospect, do you think all of those people made a
mistake by investing in a set of cookware which saves time, money, and
food value?” Prospect: “Probably not.” Ralph: “As you can see, there are
three lines at the bottom of the list. Will it be all right if I go ahead and put
your name and address on those lines to indicate you took action to get
something you’ve repeatedly said you really wanted?” Prospect: “Yes, go
ahead.”
The most effective testimonials, with the most dramatic results, are those
obtained by Bernie Lofchick from Winnipeg, Canada. Bernie is a Maytag
distributor and has achieved the highest level of market penetration of any
Maytag distributor in their worldwide network, including over fifty
countries. Interestingly enough, Bernie’s retail outlet, which is not only a
successful profit center but a learning and training center for the other
outlets as well, is located next door to a large discount store featuring
washing machines, many of which are priced at less than half as much as
the Maytag. Bernie considers the competitive store an asset to his business.
He and Maytag sell quality, durability, performance, and service.
Recently he sold a new Maytag to a customer who reluctantly traded in her
old wringer model, which was still doing a superb job after over forty years
of service. She traded it in only because her arthritis had gotten so painful
she could no longer operate it.
One of the most effective closes Bernie and his staff use involves
telephone calls to satisfied customers who have been using their Maytags
five, ten, fifteen, even twenty or twenty-five years. When these customers
give their testimonials about service, performance, and durability, somehow
the price objection completely disappears and a new Maytag customer joins
the ranks.
These two approaches fit special situations, but satisfied customers can
be, should be, and in many cases want to be helpful to you in selling
additional prospects. Let’s look at what sales pro Mike Frank has to say
about the importance of customer testimonials, how to get them, and how to
use them.

Why Use Testimonials?
Whether you and I personally like television, radio, newspaper, and
magazine advertising which uses man- or woman-on-the-street
“testimonials,” recommendations, or endorsements, it is apparent the major
corporations feel they are effective or they wouldn’t spend millions of
dollars per year on “testimonial” advertising. Think of just a few which
come to your mind, past or present: American Express, beer companies,
paper products, dental products, securities companies, Dale Carnegie
courses, Charmin, 7-Up, Coca-Cola, Pepsi, etc. (Think further. Do you
really think major corporations would continue to pay millions for
celebrities to endorse their products if those endorsements did not pay off?)
Most salespeople who have been selling successfully for any length of
time often receive testimonial letters on an unsolicited basis. These
endorsements will usually compliment the salesperson on his effectiveness,
follow-up, or attitude. They express appreciation for the salesperson’s extra
effort, how happy they are with the product, or how pleased they were with
the company’s handling of a service problem. Any letters you may have
already received serve as a base for your “collection.” (Many salespeople
who have received such letters appreciate them but don’t realize what a
valuable sales tool they can be. As a result, they do a lot of verbal selling
when these letters have more credibility than anything the salesperson can
say.) Remember: People believe more of what they see than what they hear.
This is especially true in this case, because the prospect always considers
the salesperson at least partly biased and often feels that a satisfied
customer is just being honest.

Getting Those Testimonials
Testimonials are easy to get. Example: Let’s suppose you went to a fine,
newly opened restaurant last night in your hometown. You loved the food,
atmosphere, and service, and they topped it off by bringing you the check at
the proper time. As you left, you indicated your pleasure to the manager,
owner, or maitre d’. He thanked you and asked you some of the things we
discussed in the previous paragraphs. Would you write him a letter based on
his request? Ninety percent of you would say you would and 50 percent of
you actually would write. You would be happy to help and even flattered

that your opinion and approval were respected so highly. The request for
the testimonial was a testament to your sincerity.
If you have been selling for a few years, think about those customers you
have who have verbally told you how appreciative they are of your product,
service, or idea . . . or of you as their salesperson . . . or of your company
for any reason. Question: Doesn’t it make sense to capitalize on these
satisfied customers to find more satisfied customers? Do this. Make a list of
all of those who fall into this category, or those whom you think might feel
this way but haven’t verbalized it to you. Now either call them or go see
them. (Your list might have five or fifty names on it. Make contact with all
of them.) Your presentation to them is similar to the following:
“Hi, ____________. How is everything going with your
____________?” (If they have a problem, assure them you will get the
problem remedied and do so. If all is well, which it will be about 90 percent
of the time, then proceed.) “I’m calling [or I’m here] to ask you an
important question and a favor which could help me immensely in my
selling career, without my asking you to buy a thing. Is that fair enough?”
Smile and pause. (The response is usually positive or encouraging.)
“Remember when you told me a few weeks ago how pleased you were with
our company [service or me]?” Wait for a response. “Well, believe it or not,
we still have a lot of nonbelievers out there. It would mean a lot to me if
you would share those feelings in a letter on one of your letterheads, at your
convenience, and send it to me. Would you do that for me?” About 90
percent will say yes. About half of them will do it. Don’t ask them again.
The 50 percent is sufficient to build your letter file. (If the customer is one
who has not verbalized his feelings to you, then of course don’t mention
that he has told you of his pleasure in the past. Merely ask him his feelings
about the company, service, you, etc., and if the response is positive, then
ask him to do you the favor by writing you a letter regarding whatever
praise he has.)
If the letter is in praise of the product and/or company, that’s fine; it
doesn’t have to be to you or about you. You can use letters from fellow
salespeople, and if you work with others and all of you do this as a team
effort, many of the letters can be mutually used.

The next step is to get them copied on a top-quality copying machine.
Place them in nice plastic pages and then enter the pages into your
presentation manual. If you don’t use a presentation manual (and we
suggest that 95 percent of all top salespeople do have some type of manual
with company information, prices, testimonial letters, guarantees, etc.), then
we suggest you get a small three-ring binder for the letters.
Learn the letters. Testimonial letters don’t do you any good if you are not
completely familiar with them. Use a yellow highlighting pen to emphasize
the key points of the letter, which is the message you want delivered
anyway. Take this manual with you on all presentations.

Use Testimonials This Way
To use customer testimonials effectively, you must be able to turn to the
right one without delay, because in most cases you will use only one or two
in any presentation. Sometimes they can be used to get in to see the
prospect. As a general rule they are used in the conviction step or to answer
an objection.
Example: The prospect might say to you, “I’m really concerned about
service.” Your response is, “Mr. Prospect, I can appreciate your concern.
Jones Johns at XYZ Company initially felt the same way, but after he had a
service need, here is what he said.” (Now you show him the letter that
answers the question or objection.) After he has read it, you continue with
your presentation. Example: The prospect might say, “I’m concerned we
won’t get the tax break you mention.” (Now show him a letter that answers
his objection.)
You may not have a letter which answers all questions or objections, but
if you keep working on building your collection of letters, eventually you
will get one to answer almost any question or objection which might arise.
Caution: While it is rare that you can have too many letters, I have seen it
happen. Replace old letters with better ones and with ones from more
credible prospects as time goes on. If you have as many as fifty letters, that
isn’t too many if you know them and can readily turn to the right one(s).
Have them filed in some semblance of order—by industry or location, or
alphabetically, or by type of question/objection, etc. (Don’t put them in file

folders unless they are just extra copies which you feel compelled to leave
with the prospect on rare occasions.)
I know some of the top auto salespeople leave their letter manual with the
prospect to read while the salesman has to go into the manager’s office for
approval. Many of the top real estate salespeople use such letters diligently.
Industrial salespeople use them, but in most cases not to the degree they
could and should. Insurance salespeople could be using them much more
effectively. Professional speakers use them as their number one referral
source and tool.
I believe a testimonial can be used effectively in almost every
presentation or demonstration—to answer a question or objection, to get in
to see the prospect, or as credibility when things are going well or not so
well in the interview. Big-ticket retail salespeople should use them far more
than they do. Testimonial letters from salespeople who may not be with the
company anymore may be used in recruitment interviews. If the letter
indicates that while the salesperson isn’t with the company now, his years
with your company were valuable and rewarding, such a good testimonial
can sell a prospective recruit.
The uses are unlimited, but the realities of using them are like anything
else. Additional effort is required to get them, learn them, highlight them,
organize them, and use them effectively as an additional sales tool. Please
be assured that the results and rewards are worth the effort—and then some.

15
Ya Gotta Have Love
You Need to Be Tough. If you are going to make it big in the world of
selling, you’ve got to be tough, and easily the toughest, most irresistible
force on earth is love. You need to love life, the profession of selling, the
prospects you deal with, your fellow man, your God, your country, and your
family.

A Love Story
I close this segment of Secrets of Closing the Sale with a love story
which I believe will be meaningful to you in your personal, family, and
sales lives.
This love story is about the game of golf. If you’re going to make it big
in the world of selling, you’ve got to have real love and concern for your
prospects. This love story demonstrates what I mean.
Playing golf is something I love to do. Several years ago, because of my
travels, I didn’t get to play very often, so when I did I’d get out there and
get after it! I teed that ball up and flat let the string all the way out! I busted
that ball, and on those occasions when I could find it, I hit it again.
As much as I love to play golf, I love my family infinitely more. And I
discovered a long time ago that regardless of the course I play, it still takes
about five hours. Since I was away from my family much of the time, I
wasn’t about to come in from a trip, grab my clubs, kiss my wife and son
good-bye, and go play golf.
So I came up with a very creative solution to my “problem.” I bought my
son, Tom, and the Redhead a set of clubs. Now golf could become a family
affair! Well, my wife and son tagged along with me for a few games, but

one day my wife said to me, “I know you love to play golf, honey. But I just
don’t enjoy it. It’s not my game.” And she quit. So much for golf buddy
number one.
Then, toward summer’s end, Tom said, “I hate to tell you this, Dad. I
really like to be with you whenever it’s possible, but I just don’t enjoy
playing golf.” So much for golf buddy number two. For the next two or
three years, I didn’t play much golf.

My Son the Salesman
Then one evening we were out for a ride and drove past a driving range.
Tom pleasantly surprised me and said, “Dad, let’s hit some golf balls.” My
sticks were in the trunk of the car and he knew it would be an “easy sale” to
get me to stop and hit a few golf balls—and he was right.
After we had hit a few, he said to me, “Dad, can I borrow one of your
woods?” I handed him the club I was using. He choked up on it and hit that
golf ball farther than I had ever seen him hit one before. Then he grinned at
me and said, “Dad, when do we head for the golf course?”

The “Bird” Hunter
A few days later, Tom and I were playing on one of the par-four holes at
the country club where we had been members for several years. He took
one of my woods and teed off. This time he must have hit it perfectly,
because that ball took off straight down the fairway just like the pros hit
them. When it hit the ground it rolled a long way and stopped in perfect
position, right in the middle of the fairway. From there he used a five-iron
for his second shot and hit the ball onto the green. Just like on TV! The ball
landed softly some forty feet from the hole. Now he was in position to get
his “bird.”
For the nongolfer, this simply means he would be one under par if he
sank his putt. (One under par on any hole is called a birdie.) Now I helped
him line up the putt and showed him how to stroke the ball. When he hit
that ball it headed straight for the hole. I knew it was good the minute he hit
it. And when his ball hit the bottom of the cup, my boy grinned and leaped
into the air. You talk about excitement! I grabbed my son and hugged him
as we did a victory dance for a minute or two.

A “Tainted” Win Is Actually a Loss
Then it dawned on me. I had a problem. My putt was coming up also and
I too was hunting my bird. And my ball was on the green much closer to the
cup. I knew that if I missed the putt Tom would think I had missed it on
purpose to let him win the hole. But that would have given him a tainted
victory, and as far as I’m concerned, that’s quite a loss.
With this in mind, I decided to do my very best. Then if I missed it, I
could face my son and say, “That’s great, son, you beat ol’ Dad fair and
square.” Then the win would not be tainted.
My best effort always includes a measure of providential help—which, I
hasten to add, is theologically sound, even on the golf course. I lined up the
ball and stroked it into the cup as well as I’ve ever stroked a putt in my life.
Before I picked up my ball, I turned to look at Tom and said, “Now tell
me the truth, son, were you pullin’ for your dad?”

The “Love” Close
I think you know what it would have meant to him if I’d missed. He was
only eleven years old and had never beaten his dad on a hole of golf. It
would have meant a great deal, and yet quietly, but without hesitation, and
very firmly, my son looked at me and said, “Dad, I always pull for you.”
That, my friends, is love. That’s pure love. That’s what we need more of
in Dallas, Texas; Portland, Oregon; Chicago, Illinois; and St. Petersburg,
Florida. That’s what we need more of in every home and every county in

every state in this great land of ours. It’s the answer to your personal,
family, and business problems, and for that matter, the world’s problems.
It’s certainly what we need in the wonderful world of selling. When you
are on a sales interview, whether you are selling a product or a business
opportunity, you must believe deeply, firmly, and sincerely that what you
offer is in the best interests of the person you are trying to persuade to take
action. If you believe this way, you can sincerely pull for your prospect to
buy for his benefit.
At that precise instant you become infinitely more effective, infinitely
more professional, infinitely more productive, and infinitely more. It’s true,
as a wise man said: “People don’t really care how much you know— until
they know how much you care about them.”
I guess if I were to sum it up, I would say despite all the information
we’ve been giving you which I’m confident is valid, in the final analysis
you tell people from your head, but you persuade—you sell—from your
heart.
In this segment of Secrets of Closing the Sale, we discovered that:
H in the heart of your sales career is honesty.
E is ego and empathy.
A is your attitude toward you, your prospects, and your profession.
R is for physical, mental, and spiritual reserve.
T is for tough, and the toughest thing is love.
Now put those beginning letters together and they form an acrostic:
HEART, because you see, the heart of your sales career is your very own,
and if your heart is right, your sales career will be right.

PART 3

The Sales Professional
OBJECTIVES
To learn how to respond, which is positive, and not react, which is
negative.
To spell out the differences between the professional salesperson and the
nonprofessional salesperson, the high performer and the moderate
performer.
To meet some real sales professionals from every walk of life and learn
firsthand some of their characteristics, methods, and procedures.
To clearly establish the fact that dentists, builders, waiters, interior
designers, schoolteachers, service station operators, children, etc., are
all salespeople.
CLOSES AND/OR PROCEDURES
The “Stood Up” Close
The “Impossible Child” Close
The “Complimentary” Close
The “Abraham Lincoln” Close
The “Previous Purchase” Close
The “Feel Good” Close
The “Tie Down” Close
The “Rainy Weather” Close
The “Spare” Close
The “Puppy Dog” Close

The “Soft Service Sell” Close
The “Accessory” Close

16
Learning and Using Professional
Techniques
Do You Respond or React? I hope you answered this question by saying
you respond, because “respond” is positive and “react” is negative.
Example: You get sick and go to the doctor. The doctor gives you a
prescription and tells you to come in the next day so he can check on you.
When you walk in the next day, the doctor takes one look, shakes his head,
and says, “We’re going to have to change your prescription because your
body is reacting to the drugs.” Nobody is happy with the negative results.
On the other hand, you go back the next day and the doctor takes one
look and says, “Looks like we’ve got the right prescription. Your body is
responding to the treatment.” Everybody is happy with those positive
results.

Here’s What the Judge Does
In the world of selling—or for that matter, just in the world—everything
we encounter is not going to be positive. For example, it would be safe to
say that 99 percent of all the salespeople who ever sold—with the possible
exception of those who strictly sell behind counters in a retail outlet—have
been “stood up” as far as appointments are concerned. This is particularly
true in direct sales, life insurance, real estate, and automobile sales. It would
be almost as safe to say that most of those who are stood up react with
anger, frustration, disappointment, or a combination of all three.
My late brother, Judge Ziglar, who broke the national sales record for the
Saladmaster Corporation in 1964 by selling over $104,000 (today that
would be over $800,000) worth of cookware, had a most unique response to

broken appointments. He conducted cookware demonstrations, which
meant he cooked large meals for several couples whom the hostesses had
invited to attend. After demonstrating, he made appointments to see the
couples in the privacy of their own homes the next day.
On occasion, when he arrived at the appointed time, no one would be at
home. Instead of reacting with dismay, despair, frustration, or anger, Judge
responded by saying, “Oh, boy! That’s a sure sale!”

The “Stood Up” Close
The next day, at precisely the appointed hour for the day before, he
would again appear at the door. When the husband or wife came to the door,
Judge would immediately start with an apology. “I’m so sorry I missed you
yesterday. I did everything in my power to see you, but it just wasn’t
possible.” (He was being 100 percent honest. He had done everything in his
power to see them. He had been there at the appointed time.)
Judge said that you would be astonished at the number of grown people
who would let him take the blame for their discourtesy. At that point, as he
expressed it, he knew the sale was his. Here’s why. If they did not have the
courage to face him and say no at the appointed time, then they were not
psychologically equipped to deal with a highly motivated, enthusiastic,
well-trained professional salesman like him. By responding with that
attitude, it’s not difficult to understand why he broke the record.
I need to explain that the prime reason Judge was so motivated was he
believed with all his heart that the family he was calling on desperately
needed—even had to have—his set of cookware. He knew it would save
them money, work, and precious food value for their children. He truly had
a missionary zeal in selling his product. He also understood human nature
and the real reason they stood him up. I elaborated on this in the very first
segment, but basically the couple wanted the cookware but didn’t think they
could afford it and feared they were too weak to say no to their desires.
Solution: Stand up the salesman. Reminder: That’s the reason you, my
selling friend, need to develop the empathy I covered in chapter 8.

The “Impossible Child” Close

That’s not all. Most direct salespeople react with frustration and dismay
when a small child disrupts the demonstration by climbing into the
briefcase or sample case and scattering papers and samples from side to
side. Frequently the parents will, in a weak, somewhat pathetic tone of
voice, say, “Now, son, you shouldn’t bother the salesman’s papers.”
On occasion the husband will turn to his wife and say, “Honey, that child
is impossible! Can’t you do something with him?” To this the wife
frequently gets up, takes the youngster out, and tells him to stay in his
room. Three minutes later the youngster is back in the briefcase or samples,
wreaking havoc. Now in despair the father and mother pull their hair, wring
their hands, scream at the child, and beg him to behave himself.
It’s at this point Judge Ziglar said he knew he had made the sale. Again,
if they could not say no to a three-year-old, how could they say no to a
highly motivated, well-trained professional salesman like him? Judge
pointed out it was obvious to him the parents did not love their child
enough to discipline him. He (Judge) loved children, all children, but
especially the neglected ones. As he expressed it, “Since it is obvious this
‘impossible’ child will never have the advantage of loving discipline, I feel
even more strongly the child must have the best possible chance at good,
nutritious food for a healthy body.”
We’re dealing with an attitude in selling, but it also involves some
knowledge of human nature and just good, common sense. If you think
about it, that’s what the highly motivated, well-trained professional
salesperson uses most often. And he certainly works on his thought
processes and attitude until he can look at his sales situations and respond
instead of react.

17
Characteristics of the
Professional Salesperson
Since I constantly make reference to the fact that the salesperson is the most
important part of the sales process, let’s take a look at the sales professional.
First of all, he clearly understands that logic makes people think, but it is
emotion that makes them act. He knows if he uses all logic in a sales
presentation, chances are excellent he will end up with the best-educated
prospect in town who will buy from someone else. If he uses all emotion in
a sales presentation, chances are excellent he will make the sale but,
unfortunately, chances are also good the prospect will cancel the order.
However, he knows that when he uses emotion and logic in the
presentation, chances are excellent he will end up with a sale today and a
happy customer for the future.
The professional understands that logic is aimed at and appeals to the
eye. Emotion is aimed at and appeals to the ear. This is why, when humanly
possible, we not only tell people what our merchandise or goods will do but
we demonstrate at the same time.
We’ve been conditioned to believe what we see instead of what we hear.
The eyes have truly been called the “windows of the soul”—the mind’s eye
believes what it sees. The eyes are the only one of our sense organs which
connect directly to the brain. For this reason, logically we accept more
readily what we see than what we hear. However, we are moved into action
by what we hear. Remember, our “feeling” brain is ten times as large as our
“thinking” brain, so “tell ’em” and “show ’em” and your chances of selling
them are greatly multiplied.

Extrovert or Introvert
There are probably a thousand different opinions regarding the
professional salesperson. The man on the street thinks he is a happy-golucky, storytelling, backslapping, extroverted, hail-fellow-well-met type of
an individual. The truth is the professional salesperson is far more likely to
be introverted than he is extroverted. Not painfully so, but by nature he is
quieter and more serious. Obviously, there are exceptions to every rule. But
let’s look at the extrovert versus the introvert.
The extrovert is a person who is more likely to make a good first
impression. He is easy to like and establishes rapport fairly well. In too
many instances, however, he depends on the force of his personality to get
the sale. On a one-call, one-shot item when he’s passing through town,
that’s fine. However, if he’s going to build a career, that’s a different matter.
If he’s selling on a continuing basis to the same buyer, that, too, is a
different matter.
The introvert is more likely to be thorough in his studies, precise in his
presentation, and knowledgeable about the goods, products, or services his
company has to offer. He is better organized. He knows where he’s going to
be at a given time. He’s far more likely to plan his schedule and then work
that schedule. He is in most cases a better listener and is a better student at
uncovering the prospect’s needs.
Of course, the ideal professional salesperson is an extrovert who is so
serious about his profession he works to develop some of the introvert’s
characteristics so he can more effectively serve his customers. Or he is an
introvert who is so committed to his profession he develops some of the
extrovert’s characteristics so he can more effectively serve his customers.

High Performers vs. Moderate Performers
The study by DeMarco and Maginn of The Forum Corporation revealed
that highly successful salespeople practice fundamental sales skills,
management skills, and good human relations to get along with staff
members, customers, and other salespeople. They do not abdicate
responsibility for installation, implementation, and service to technical

support people. They continue to maintain a “service” relationship which
younger salespeople, interested in building a career, need to learn.
High performers—regardless of the industry—involve others by
soliciting opinions, sharing information, and establishing trust relationships
inside the organization. Indications are extremely strong these highperforming salespeople could move from the sales force into a bank or
manufacturing concern and perform at the same level. The revelation was
that ability to sell is not what separates the moderate performer from the
high performer. The other factors—trust, relationships, etc.—were the key.
The high-performing sales professionals are total, well-balanced people
with integrity who are knowledgeable and aggressively caring in their
creative approach to solving problems.
A Team Player with Integrity. The high performer is an influence
manager of considerable skill and serves as the liaison or connecting link
between the customer in the field and the support people in the company.
He works with his support people in a way that enhances their productivity
and self-esteem while concentrating on issues important to building and
maintaining a productive, trusting relationship with the customer.
The high performer helps with related products and services and
simplifies the decision-making process for the customer by his willingness
to identify other sources of help if the needs of the client extend beyond his
expertise and the capability of his own company. Customers value integrity
very highly and expect to receive hints as well as knowledgeable responses
to their questions.
High-performing salespeople represent the interests of their company and
of their clients with dignity, integrity, and skill. They bring added value to
the sales task with greater enthusiasm, more sensitive interpersonal skills,
and a sense of professionalism. They communicate clearly and sensitively
to customers and support staff, which builds customer confidence that they
know what they’re doing. They also understand that the product or service
itself does not build value but that salespeople build value with every visit
to a customer.
Building internal relationships clearly is a key to the success of high
performers. Moreover, the high performer is a team player whose internal-

relationship behavior is consistent with the behavior that makes him
successful with customers. He also sees his sales managers as a resource to
be called upon at the appropriate moment and indicates that his manager is
an effective leader who encourages initiative and provides support.

The Professional
He is so other-people conscious he never lets his ego hinder his efforts.
He understands his function as a professional is not to attempt to help the
prospect decide on buying or not buying, but rather to give information so
the prospect will have the facts to make an intelligent decision. He gives
some inspirational or motivational input so the prospect will be inspired to
make the right decision.
The professional is thick-skinned to the degree that he is not offended
easily by what the prospect has to say. This does not mean he accepts
abusive language or insulting manners. It does mean he knows that many
times the prospect has been abused by other salespeople and he is able to
understand that the prospect is not rejecting him but is simply refusing the
offer he’s making.

The Professional Understands
The professional thinks in terms of service, but he also thinks in terms of
his ability to make the sale on a specific call. He expects to make the sale.
He is versatile in his sales knowledge and his approach. He works from a
plan and not a can, but as a professional he knows that while there are many
ways to say things, there is one best way. As a result, he includes many
verbatim phrases, explanations, and expressions in every sales presentation.
He feels strongly that it is his responsibility to sell so clearly that the
prospect understands it is in his best interests to buy.
He knows when the prospect acts in an abusive manner it is often a
defensive measure prompted by a sense of fear because of his own feeling
of inferiority or ego inadequacy. He understands one universal rule in the
world of selling and applies it with diligence and enthusiasm. That rule is
his absolute conviction that he needs to find out what the prospect wants
and then help him get it.

The dictionary defines the professional as “one who has an assured
competence in a particular field or occupation.” It’s quality of performance.
The professional has a good sense of humor. He takes his profession and his
prospects’ needs seriously—but not himself.

The Professional Is a Student
He clearly understands that school is never out for him. He studies his
prospects, studies his company literature, and studies the art of persuasion.
He reads good books, listens to inspirational recordings, attends training
sessions, and most of all, on every sales interview he studies human nature.
He knows if he’s going to change his status in life, he must change his
performance. To change that performance he needs to change his thinking.
To change his thinking he must change the input into his mind, so he
selectively chooses the “good stuff” for his mind food. He understands very
clearly that his mind is not a garbage dump—it’s a temple.
The professional “goes to school” by watching good salespeople in
action, whether at the direct, wholesale, or retail level. He constantly asks
himself questions like, “How can I take this procedure and translate it into
my own sales situation so I can more effectively sell and service my
customers?” He knows his prospects will make their decision based on what
they understand and believe, so he undersells, keeps it simple, and makes it
believable.
The Professional “Lives” Selling. Yes, he’s sales conscious. He wakes
up in the morning thinking sales. He goes to work thinking sales. He comes
home thinking sales. The only difference is that when he gets home he
understands that even though his sales situation is different, he will use the
same basic procedures and work from the same character base. He
remembers that selling is a transference of feeling, and hypocrisy on these
“sales calls” will produce the same negative results they produce with his
other “prospects.”
From his heart he must sell his children on being the best possible
children. From his heart he sells his wife on the idea that he’s a good
husband and then demonstrates the point he wishes to make. In short, he is
other-people conscious from morning to evening. The beautiful thing is that
it’s so much fun for him that it gets to be—and is—second nature.

He understands that people buy for their reasons and not his. For this
reason he studies a great deal about motivation and human behavior, fully
understanding that in order to influence behavior you need to understand
something about it. He understands that a good idea, procedure, or
technique does not care who owns or uses it.
The professional is an optimist. He looks on the bright side of every
aspect of life. He knows the average prospect experiences enough gloom
and doom in his life and does not appreciate a salesman spreading
additional gloom. The professional understands that he—to a very large
degree—is in control of the buying climate. With that in mind he does not
discuss irrelevant subject matter and does not bring in the latest national or
local tragedy. He creates an atmosphere of excitement and optimism so his
chances of making the sale are greatly enhanced. He has great singleness of
purpose and concentration on the immediate objective, whether it is to
make the sale, placate a disgruntled customer, or make a follow-through
P.R. call. This singleness of purpose enables the professional to zero in on
the customer’s dominant buying motive and concentrate his energies and
attention on helping the prospect get what he wants. He’s highly motivated
and transmits his excitement to his prospects, who are motivated to respond
by taking action.

The Professional Is Adaptable
He is a thinker, but he clearly understands it is better to emulate genius
than to create mediocrity, so he evaluates materials and procedures on the
basis of results. If the techniques and methods he is using are getting
desirable results, he will stay with them. But he abandons any procedure or
technique that proves to be ineffective. He does not permit himself to get
comfortable in using a sales process and continuing to use it long after it
has lost its effectiveness. He’s aware of change in procedure, but he’s even
more aware of the fact that principles do not change.

The Professional Is Career Oriented
Because he is career oriented, every action is taken with the idea in mind
of building a career rather than just making that individual sale. The
professional fully understands the old cliché that words alone will often fail,

so he demonstrates to make the sale. He understands that when the prospect
sees the product or service demonstrated, the believability factor increases.
He also clearly understands that if you hear something, you will forget it; if
you see it, you will remember it; but if you hear it, see it, and do it, you will
understand and be far more inclined to take action. With this in mind he
gets the customer involved in the presentation. He lets that customer feel
the cloth as he slips on the coat. He permits him to do the driving in the
demonstration. He lets that customer sit down at the keyboard and work the
word processor or the computer. He uses visuals and testimonials in his
presentation.
He encourages the housewife to take her turn with the vacuum cleaner.
She permits her customers to apply the makeup personally so they will have
confidence that yes, they can do exactly the same thing. In short, the
professional salesperson gets the customer involved in the use of the
products, goods, or services.
The professional possesses conviction, concern, confidence, and courage.
His conviction is strong that his product will solve the prospect’s problem.
His concern is genuine that the prospect buy now for his own benefit. His
confidence is strong that he can persuade the prospect to take action, and
his courage enables him to ask the prospect to take action now for his own
best interests.
The professional has an incurable curiosity! He doesn’t just wonder why
the grass is greener on the other side, he climbs over the fence to see how
the grass is being fertilized and learns the brand they’re using.

The Professional Looks and Acts Professional
The professional looks the part of a professional. He is appropriately
dressed for the occasion. He knows you can’t play the role of success
dressed in the costume of failure. He understands that you cannot harvest
this year’s crop on last year’s fertilizer, so he constantly plants the right
thoughts and procedures in his mind. In short, he appropriately dresses both
mind and body.
The professional is a person of principle. He understands that the man or
woman who won’t stand for something will fall for anything. He knows if
you add one small bit to the truth that you inevitably subtract from it. He

buys the statement of Will Rogers, who said, “I would rather be the man
who bought the Brooklyn Bridge than the one who sold it.” The implication
is clear that he will bend over backwards to protect his integrity and to keep
from taking advantage of anyone. He understands that, as Ann Landers
says, that’s an awkward position, but he knows he won’t fall on his face
while leaning over backwards.
The professional is a hard worker. He understands, as sales trainer Steve
Brown from Atlanta, Georgia, puts it, that anything worth doing is worth
doing poorly—until you learn how to do it well. And he sticks and studies
until he learns to do it professionally. He clearly knows we do not get work
done through people, but we develop people through the work. In short, he
knows activity precedes accomplishment and learning generally precedes
activity. He does his homework and practices at sales meetings and in front
of his family. He is eager to get in front of the prospect for the final
examination, where he puts his learning on trial and reaches his objectives.
As sales trainer Phil Lynch said, he prepares for tomorrow by performing
today.

The Professional Is on the Grow
The professional builds a beautiful library containing much information
about the sales profession, the sales process, and the people he sells. He
would never dream of going to a doctor who quit studying when he finished
medical school, or an attorney who quit studying when he finished law
school. He would be dismayed if he realized the doctor or the attorney had
no resource materials to refer to and learn from. With this in mind he builds
his own sales library and adds to it on a regular basis.
He understands that the average salesperson spends several hundred
dollars a year dressing the outside of his or her head—that’s for shaves,
haircuts, hairspray, cosmetics, cologne, and perfume—and will spend a
minimum of three thousand dollars dressing his body, and several thousand
on transportation. Now, after having spent thousands of dollars getting
ready to go sell, he clearly understands that as a professional he needs to
know what to say when he gets there. With that in mind he constantly fills
his library and—more importantly—his head with the new procedures and
techniques.

He is able to put his investment in books, recordings, and training
seminars into perspective by understanding how much it costs him and/ or
his company to make a sales call—and how much more it costs to miss the
sale because of inadequate, erroneous, or incomplete information. Laptop
computers, cell phones, instant this and instant that provide an incredible
sales opportunity advantage. Though the dollar cost for a sales call is high,
the cost in human frustration and wrecked sales careers because of a lack of
sales information, technique, and inspiration is infinitely higher. The cost of
acquiring the necessary training information is minute in comparison to the
cost of not acquiring that training. Like the man said, “If you think
education is expensive, just look at the cost of ignorance.” Or, to make it
personal, how many times have you missed a sale and later picked up some
information or technique which you know would have made the difference
(it hurt, didn’t it)?
P.S. Congratulations for investing in Secrets and getting this involved in
the learning process. Keep it up. You are growing!

The Professional Pushes Himself
The professional sets internal standards for performance. He has goals
which he works on daily. Generally speaking, according to an article in
Psychology Today, he sets his own quotas and goals higher than the
company would set them. He is far more inclined to use his spare time in
sales-related tasks. For example, when things are slow he writes follow-up
or thank-you notes to customers instead of killing time reading magazines,
drinking coffee, or engaging in bull sessions.
As times change, the professional changes procedures and techniques but
never changes the concepts and philosophy of delivering as much as
possible, as enthusiastically as possible, at the lowest fair price.
The professional knows that all the knowledge contained in the books in
the Library of Congress won’t work without the magic of common sense
and judgment. In the final analysis he understands that his career will
depend on what he does with what he knows, not just on what he knows.

Not a Professional

The professional understands that you don’t become a salesperson by
answering an ad in a newspaper and grabbing a briefcase with a prospectus
in it any more than you become an engineer by buying a calculator or
become a doctor by acquiring a stethoscope.
There’s far more to being a salesman than simply smiling, dressing
neatly, telling some good stories, and learning a few good lines.
When I speak of the professional, I’m obviously not talking about the
guy or gal who is a dropout from some other profession or the ones who
simply drifted into selling because it was “easy.” (“All you’ve got to do is
talk”—they think—“and since I’m a good talker, I’ll be a good
salesperson.” One of the myths exploded by The Forum Corporation study
is that a salesperson has to be a glib fast-talker.) Nor am I talking about the
part-time clerk who went to work six weeks before Christmas to pick up
some extra money.

The Professional Gets with It
The professional has chosen the profession of selling and stays in school
throughout his entire career, consistently working to earn the title
“salesman.” He works as hard on his attitude, self-image, relationships, and
goals as he does on procedures and techniques. He clearly understands that
he must get the person ready before he can get the salesperson ready.
The professional understands that he needs to stay “green and growing,”
because a green salesman is always better than a blue one. He knows as
long as he’s green he’s growing, but when he gets ripe he will rot.
The professional salesman is the story of the high jumper who broke the
world’s record. Somebody asked him how he did it and he responded, “I
threw my heart over the bar and the rest of me followed.”
When you really get your heart into the profession of selling and with the
company you’re representing, you will acquire the skills, procedures, and
technique necessary for success. As Dr. Robert Schuller, author of Move
Ahead with Possibility Thinking, says:

“Spectacular achievement is always preceded by unspectacular
preparation.”

The professional’s attitude is such that he’s grateful for some of the
difficulties. He doesn’t want to be like this old boy down home who stated
that he would occasionally like a blessing which was not in disguise. I
mention this because when we encounter the tough prospect and the tough
sale, we must remember that the tough prospects are our best teachers, and
if all sales were easy and “anybody could do it,” our commissions would be
about one-tenth as much as they are.
The professional understands completely that competition is getting
keener all the time, and so he must do the same thing. The professional has
character; he is not one.
As sales pro Mike Frank says, “The professional acquires and maintains
a ‘prospecting awareness.’ He seeks prospects from current and former
clients as well as everyone he calls on, regardless of sales results. He
cultivates them at the supermarket, the club, and restaurants, as well as
other social contacts. He utilizes information gleaned from radio, TV, and
newspapers as well as billboards and bus signs. He ‘sees’ a prospect behind
every bush and tree and around every corner.”
The professional keeps records. He remembers what has made him
successful and he keeps the same hustle, enthusiasm, and dedication to the
job. Those factors which got him started, combined with expertise,
experience, skill, and knowledge, are what make him the successful
professional. He is a student and reads good books and publications on
selling and motivation.
Question as you read this book: Is this the first one you’ve read this year
or is it the sixth? If it’s June or later, I sincerely hope it’s at least the sixth
one.

Recency, Frequency, Potency, and Recommendation
In the world of professional selling, the professional remembers that if
he’s going to build a career instead of just selling one customer one time
and then having to look for another, he must take seriously the advice of Dr.
Joseph Braysich, the “body language” expert from Sydney, Australia. He
advocates the use of the “recency, frequency, potency, recommendation”
formula, which is self-explanatory.

Recency. This refers to how long it has been since you were in touch with
your customers to let them know you are available to serve, tell them that
you appreciate their business, and inform them about a new addition to your
product line or a new use for the products they already have. According to
Dr. Braysich, customers, even those who are good friends, need to be
reminded of your existence and your eagerness to meet their needs or solve
their problems.
Frequency. This will vary tremendously with the product and the
practicality of the time investment as it relates to production, but in a
competitive world, in some shape, form, or fashion, your customers need to
be reminded of your existence and your interest. Otherwise, competition
which has no feeling of “I’ve already got that customer” complacency
enters the picture and you’re short one customer.
The man who is one of the best in the world at keeping his name in front
of his customers is Joe Girard, who with Stanley H. Brown wrote the bestselling book How to Sell Anything to Anybody. His phenomenal success in
the automobile business enabled him to write a book on selling based on his
personal experiences. To the best of my knowledge, he holds all the records
for selling cars. He sold:
1963—267 cars/trucks
1965—343 cars/trucks
1967—667 cars
1969—764
1971—980
1973—1,425 (record year)
1975—1,360
1977—over 1,200

1964—307 cars/trucks
1966—614 cars
1968—708
1970—843
1972—1208
1974—1376
1976—over 1,200

For the details on this astonishing performance, you should pick up Joe’s
book and carefully read what he has to say. There are many remarkable
things about his record. First is the fact that over this fifteen-year period of
time, he averaged nearly nine hundred cars per year, and these were all
individual sales—no fleet sales at any time. Second, these were sales and
not “deals” or giveaways. His company made a profit, Joe made a profit,
and the customers obviously “won,” too, or they would not have returned
time after time. Third, Joe was the number one automobile salesman in

America every year from 1967 to 1977. The magnitude of that feat almost
defies description. Fourth, despite the fact there were two recessions during
his first eleven years, he sold more cars every year than he had sold the
previous year. Fifth, the last six years he sold cars on a full-time basis
(before getting heavily involved as a speaker and writer) he averaged over
thirteen hundred cars sold each year.
There are many reasons for such phenomenal sales success, but one of
them is the fact that once a month Joe dropped a card in the mail to every
one of his customers. Obvious ones like Christmas, Easter, birthday, and
anniversary; and not-so-obvious ones like Happy Fourth of July, Labor Day,
or Washington’s or Lincoln’s Birthday. With cards coming all the time his
customers consider Joe a member of the family, or at least an old friend.
That’s the way a real professional does things.
Mike Frank adds his own touch to this process by handwriting a
minimum of seven cards every day. Mike uses a note pad which includes
his picture, because many of his contacts are of a ten-to-fifteen-minute
duration, during which time he sells his prospect on inviting him back at a
later date to conduct a meeting. The purpose of the meeting is to sell tickets
for an upcoming sales and motivation congress. The note reminds the
prospect of the date and the picture helps him to put Mike’s name and face
together. Mike does the same thing with people he did not sell to but who
might buy later. He has done this every day since 1972. Tough to do—yes.
Time consuming—yes. Rewarding—you betcha!
Potency. How strong was your impact? How solid is the relationship?
Will your customer distinctly recall your last contact? Are you solidly
entrenched because you sold and served well, or did you get in for that
initial sale through connections? It’s great to have connections to make
sales, but it’s highly dangerous and erroneous thinking to believe that once
you sell to them they are your customers.
Recommendation. This one, especially on the initial sale, is critically
important. As you will learn in the next chapter, Chuck Bellows sold me a
Cadillac because the recommendation was so strong I went to see him
prepared to believe him, to trust him, and yes, to buy from him. The
professional builds that kind of reputation. Strong recommendations are the
easiest—and by far the surest—method of building a sales career.

Finally
The professional is skilled at communicating and reading the prospect’s
communications back to him. According to some authorities, what we say
contains only 7 percent of the persuasive impact of the message. The way
we say it contains 38 percent and our body language the remaining 55
percent. With this in mind, the professional learns body language and voice
inflection. He learns and uses the words that sell and avoids the words that
unsell. (I deal with this phase of the professional in chapter 22.)
The professional is a builder and not a destroyer. He builds his fellow
salespeople. He builds his country, his company, his community. He
constantly suffers from a case of mild discontent which he instinctively
transforms to inspirational dissatisfaction, which is one of the most
powerful forces we can harness in professional selling.

18
Here Is a Professional
Let’s look at a real professional in the world of selling. I believe this story
will cover as many specific sales points, techniques, and procedures as you
will ever see covered in a sales story. Not only will it be helpful to all
salespeople, but the lessons in psychology and persuasion will also be
useful to any layman or professional who ever has to “sell” an idea. In
short, it will help you—personally and professionally.
This story will “cover the waterfront” since it includes voice inflection,
how to ask questions, the importance of sales skill and the salesperson, how
to effectively negotiate the determining factor in the sale, how to move
from the seller’s side of the table to the buyer’s side, how to lead prospects
to new decisions, how to break the price down so it’s not such a big factor,
and how and why you should sell value. It covers the steps you take to
make the prospect feel good about unsatisfactory previous purchases, the
importance of the follow-through in building a sales career, how to use the
Abraham Lincoln approach in convincing the prospect to take action, how
to gently chastise the vacillating prospect, and much more.

People Remember Stories
As you have already noticed, Secrets of Closing the Sale contains many,
many stories. I tell a lot of sales stories for two good reasons. First, you are
far less likely to let your mind drift when you are reading a story (provided
I tell it well). Second, you remember stories more easily than anything else,
and as you recall the story you will also remember the points and
techniques taught in the story. Since you can use only what you remember,
teaching techniques through true stories and analogies is the most effective

method ever devised. As you probably know, this was the procedure used
by the Carpenter from Galilee, who was the greatest Salesman and the
greatest Teacher who ever lived.
As a teacher and trainer, I’m completely aware of the fact that if the
student didn’t learn, the teacher didn’t teach. I want this book to inform
you, to make you a better person and a better salesperson. I want it to make
you more professional and more productive. The only way it will do all
those things is if it teaches you effective techniques and inspires you to use
them.
In November of 1975, I decided to buy a new car, and since the ’76
Cadillac was especially beautiful, I visited two dealerships, went for a test
drive, and began shopping for the best overall offer. Since I drive very little,
I only buy a new car every five or six years, so I was in no special hurry to
“buy today.” In a telephone conversation with a business acquaintance, the
talk turned to cars and I commented that I was probably going to buy a new
Cadillac. He immediately told me that I ought to talk to Chuck Bellows at
Rodger Meier Cadillac.
With that comment, I said, “Well, you obviously know him. Why don’t
you give him a call, tell him I’m a nice fellow, that I’m on my way over,
and to treat me right?” To that he responded, “I’ll be glad to do that and,
Zig, I’ll tell you in advance, you can absolutely depend on Chuck Bellows.
If he tells you it’s going to rain, man, you can set your tubs out! His
reputation for being honest and for having integrity is absolutely great!”
We finished the conversation, he called Chuck, and I got into my
automobile and headed over to Rodger Meier. As I was driving down the
service road and circling the dealership, Chuck recognized my car because
our mutual friend had described it to him. When I pulled into the only
available parking slot, Chuck was standing there to open the door.

The “Complimentary” Close
Chuck is an old-fashioned guy and very definitely an introvert. As he
opened the door he said, “You’ve got to be Zig Ziglar.” Zig: “Yes, I am.”
Chuck: “Well, Mr. Ziglar, let me start by telling you I think you’re driving
one of the nicest cars I’ve ever seen. It’s absolutely beautiful!”

Point number one: Bragging about a recent or previous purchase is not a
bad way to start an interview. A sure way to make me feel good about
buying something else is to make me feel good about a previous purchase.
This is exactly what Chuck was doing. There is an “if” attached. That is, if
he’s telling me the truth. If that car’s a dog, if it’s a beat-up wreck and he
says, “Man, that’s a beautiful car!” then I grab my pocketbook and run for
my financial life because I know he’s trying to get his hands in my pocket.

Point: Make certain the observation or compliment is accurate and
sincere.
Chuck was telling the truth. It was a beautiful car. It was an Oldsmobile
Regency—two-tone brown—with all the good stuff on it which increases
the value and enhances the enjoyment of a car. So when he said, “Man,
you’ve got a beautiful car,” I responded by thanking him and telling him I
had enjoyed the car very much and it had given me excellent service. He
reiterated, “Well, it is a beautiful car. Do you mind telling me where you got
it?”

Ask Those Questions
It’s very important for you to notice these questions, because they’re
completely natural and appear to be casual, despite the fact that Chuck has
probably asked these same questions many times over the years. His
questions were not “canned,” but they were very carefully planned. I
responded that my neighbor across the street is a General Motors executive
and I got the car through him. Chuck: “Say, did you by any chance get one
of the executive cars?” Zig: “Well, as a matter of fact, I did.” Chuck: “I’ll
bet you got a good deal on it, didn’t you?” (I don’t know how you are, but
the odds are great when somebody accuses you of having made a good deal
four or five years earlier you’re going to modestly admit you did all right in
the transaction. I hope you do it modestly; otherwise it’s tacky!)
As modestly as I could, I said, “Well, Chuck, to tell you the truth, when I
bought this car it was a seventy-six-hundred-dollar automobile.”
(Remember, this was in 1975.) “It only had twenty-one hundred miles on it
and I got it for fifty-six hundred.” Chuck: “Say, you did get a good deal!”

True. I did get a good deal, but with those words I also did something
else. I loaded the first barrel of his sales shotgun. He had asked me for
information and I (a prospect) had given it to him.

Point: When you’re talking with a prospect, please remember that
in most cases he’s delighted to give you pertinent information if
you’ll just ask for it!
Chuck continued, “Mr. Ziglar, I’m delighted you’re here. Let me get the
appraiser to see just how much we can give you for your fine car. I’ll tell
you right now, if it’s as nice on the inside as it is on the outside, we’re going
to be able to swap with you today and make you happy in the process,
because we have a magnificent inventory.” He found the appraiser and they
got into the car and drove off.

Think like a Buyer—and a Seller
They went wherever it is they go when they do whatever it is they do
when they appraise a car. They were gone about ten or fifteen minutes.
When they drove back into the parking lot, old Chuck was sitting on the
passenger side, grinning like the proverbial cat which had just swallowed
the canary. I mean, he was really excited!
As a salesperson, let me remind you that you need to be thinking as a
buyer and as a seller. In this particular case, since I’m buying, I am thinking
as a buyer.
When Chuck pulled into the lot with that big grin on his face, I’ve got to
confess to you that an embarrassing thought went through my mind. (Now I
want to stress that I didn’t let it stay long before I ran it on out of there!)
The word steal entered my mind. (I figured he was so sold on my four-yearold car that he was going to pay me to swap!) Like I say, it’s embarrassing,
but again I remind you that I was a prospective customer, so I was thinking
as a customer.
To keep things in perspective, I remind you again, again, and yet again
that if you want to scale the heights as a professional salesperson, you must
always, in every sales situation, be thinking as a seller and as a buyer.

As a prospective buyer I thought to myself, “He loves my car. I’m going
to get an incredible offer on it, I just know I am!” The car stopped and
Chuck stepped out. I’m not certain, but I believe old Chuck has had some
training in dramatics. When he stepped out of the car, he closed the door,
backed away, and just shook his head. Then, as if he couldn’t believe it, he
opened the door and closed it again. He obviously loved this magnificent
machine which he was going to have an opportunity to obtain in a trade.

Bring Out Those Unspoken Objections
He looked at me and repeated what he had said earlier. “You know, Mr.
Ziglar, this really is one of the most beautiful cars I think I’ve ever seen! As
a matter of fact, it is in even better condition on the inside than it is on the
outside. You’re to be commended.” Zig: “Thank you very much, Chuck.”
He continued, “As a matter of fact, I’m a little puzzled. Please don’t
misunderstand, because I’m delighted you’re here, but I am a little curious
as to why you want to swap such a beautiful automobile at this time.”
You readers who are directly involved in the world of selling, especially
if you haven’t been at it too long, might think this question seems a bit
negative. Zig brings in a four-year-old car to trade on a new one and Chuck
is asking why he wants to swap it right now. Instead of it being negative, I
believe it is a positive sign of a competent and confident professional.
Here’s why. If there are any objections, it is infinitely better to bring them
out early so you can deal with them as part of the presentation rather than
at the end of the interview. If you, the salesperson, can smoke out any
objection early, you can sell on the offense instead of on the defense.

Back to Chuck
When Chuck asked, “Why do you want to swap this car?” I looked at
him, smiled, and replied, “Well, Chuck, to tell you the truth, we have a
family reunion in Mississippi in about three weeks and I think it would
really be nice if I drove a new Cadillac over there.” Chuck obviously
thought that would be kind of nice, too, but he didn’t say anything. (He
didn’t have to—I had just loaded the second barrel of his sales shotgun!) He
simply got out his talking pad (I’ve stressed throughout this book that you
need to keep your talking pad handy) and started figuring. He had a big grin

on his face, so my confidence that I was going to get a really good offer
went up even more.

From High to Low to High
Unfortunately, that feeling was short-lived, because after he’d been
figuring a moment or so, that magnificent grin of his started to fade into
neutral. As the grin dissolved I looked at him and thought to myself, Oh,
no! He’s hit a snag, maybe even found something wrong, and my heart
started to sink. He continued to figure and after a few more minutes that
magnificent expression of a moment earlier which had shifted into neutral
shifted all the way into plain ugly! As a matter of fact, I’ve never seen such
a high concentration of ugly in one small spot in my life! My heart literally
went all the way down to my heels. I was thinking (more accurately,
talking) to myself, Oh, no! He’s found something wrong and I just know I’m
not going to be able to get that beautiful new Cadillac I’ve really set my
heart on!
In retrospect, I should have been more optimistic, especially since I do
have a reputation for being a positive thinker. Actually, I was guilty of
selling Chuck Bellows short and I shouldn’t have done that, because among
other things, he is a fighter! I mean, he flat hung in there and kept figuring
and kept figuring and kept figuring. Finally, that ugly on his face started
shifting back into neutral and I caught myself pulling for him, Come on,
Chuck, hang in there, man, stay with it! And bless his heart, that’s exactly
what he did.
After a few more minutes of concentrated figuring, that neutral
expression went back to his magnificent smile. At that point Chuck looked
up from his talking pad and in an excited voice said, “Mr. Ziglar, I’ve got
marvelous news for you! Because of the remarkably good condition of your
car, and because of our wonderful inventory, we’re going to be able to swap
with you today for just seventy-three eighty-five.”

I Almost Had a Heart Attack!
Please don’t misunderstand—I’m an educated man. I mean, I watch
television and I read the newspapers and everybody knows that’s where you
get your education. I knew that the price of automobiles had been going up-

up-up-UP! Not only that but my friends and all of my relatives had been
saying to me, “Zig, you cannot believe what has happened to the price of
automobiles! Man, they’ve gone absolutely crazy!” But my friends and
relatives were talking about a different subject.

That’s a Lot of Money!
They were talking about their cars and their money. Chuck Bellows was
talking to me about my car and my money, and that’s an entirely different
ball game. When he said, “Seventy-three eighty-five,” and that’s what he
said, just as smoothly and easily as anything you’ve ever heard (he didn’t
say, “Seven thousand three hundred eighty-five dollars”), I screamed like a
stuck pig!
“Whooo-whooo! Chuck! Man alive,” I said, “that’s a lot of money!”
Chuck looked me in the eye and quietly asked a very simple question—
with just the right voice inflection, I might add. “Mr. Ziglar, is it too
much?”

Important point: He didn’t argue, get defensive, or try to justify the
price. He had quietly and with an almost casual confidence put the
ball back in my court.
What Is He Asking Me? As a player in this game I’ve got to ask myself
some questions and make some decisions. First, what is he asking me? Is he
asking me if the price is beyond my reach, is it out of my financial range?
Does it represent a challenge? Is he really telling me that if I can’t handle
the $7,385 difference I should act like a man and confess that I just can’t
handle that much money? Dear reader, if you know anything at all about
me, you know that in a thousand years I never would have confessed that I
couldn’t handle the investment. No way.
Or was his statement/question something of an altogether different
nature? Was he simply asking, “Mr. Ziglar, as a wise and prudent
businessman, do you feel the seventy-three eighty-five at this time is more
than you wish to give in exchange for these two automobiles?”

If the latter is the question, then I have no trouble pleading guilty. I
responded, “Chuck, that’s just more money than I’m willing to invest in the
difference.” Pleasantly and gently he stayed on the offensive with another
direct but simple question. “Mr. Ziglar, what do you think would be a fair
difference to give in exchange between your magnificent four-year-old
Oldsmobile Regency and our gorgeous new Cadillac Sedan deVille?”

The “Abraham Lincoln” Close
Please notice that throughout this entire presentation Chuck Bellows
never once said anything derogatory or negative about my automobile. He
used the Abraham Lincoln approach. Lincoln used to argue both sides of
the case when he was presenting it to the jury. He would take the
opposition’s side, then he would take his client’s side. He was very careful
to bring out more points in his own favor, but when he took the opposition’s
side he was always fair, although he was undoubtedly not quite as eloquent
as when he presented his client’s case.

The “Previous Purchase” Close
Chuck’s technique and psychology were perfect. Any attack on my car
would have been an attack on me personally. After all, I had bought the car
and when you attack the purchase you attack the purchaser and his
judgment. When parents criticize or malign the boyfriend or girlfriend of
their son or daughter, they are attacking the judgment, taste, and
intelligence of their child. That’s often the reason kids rebel. That is not the
way to win friends and influence people—or our children, or our prospects.
Be careful and tactful when a prospect says something derogatory about
a purchase previously made. (Tact, as you probably know, is the art of
recognizing when to be big and when not to belittle.) Statements such as
“Boy, they sure took advantage of me!” or “They saw me coming!” can be
disastrous for you if you agree with the prospect.
Example: If you say, “Obviously, they were not completely honest with
you,” or “I agree they did see you coming,” comments like that will lead
your prospect to think, Yeah, they got to me, but partner, I’m going to watch
you and I will guarantee that you are not going to get to me! You wave a
red flag and alert the prospect to be skeptical of you when you say anything

derogatory about your prospect’s previous purchase or a salesperson with
whom your prospect previously dealt.
What do you say when your prospect makes a negative statement about a
previous purchase? Try this: Look your prospect in the eye and quietly say,
“In retrospect, Mr. Prospect, I’m confident that most of us would make
some of our decisions differently if we could make them again. However, at
the time you made this decision, under the circumstances which existed at
that moment and with the information you had at your disposal, I’m
confident that most of us would have made the same decision you did, so I
wouldn’t feel bad about something which happened such a long time ago.”

The best way to get a prospect to make a favorable new decision is
to make him happy with an old decision.
Make the Prospect Feel Good
The question is, have you been honest with the prospect? The answer is
obvious when you answer the next question: Did you ever buy anything and
then later wish you had not bought it? Reflect on that for a moment. You
bought because you felt you were making the right decision. When you
acquire anything of any significance, you do so because you figure it is a
“good deal” and in your best interests. Just remember that your prospect felt
exactly the same way at the time he made his purchase.
By following this procedure Chuck was making me feel good. He was
talking about my beautiful four-year-old Oldsmobile Regency, but that’s not
all he was doing. By inquiring as to what I thought a fair exchange would
be, he was also finding out early in the interview if I was a real prospect. He
knew that if I offered $500 in exchange for the new car that I was just
wasting time and he would do better to terminate the interview.

Same Ballpark—Same Ball Game
A similar situation could exist in the real estate business. For example, a
home is listed for $395,000 and the prospect says, “Well, let’s make an offer
of $195,000.” The real estate agent knows he doesn’t have a prospect when
an offer is so low it indicates they’re not only in different ballparks but

they’re also in different ball games! You need to know this as early as
possible so that you can make a sound decision as to whether your time
could be more effectively invested with the prospect at hand or with
someone else. That is exactly what Chuck was doing.
The question “Mr. Ziglar, what do you think is a fair exchange?” will
provide Chuck with the answer he needs so he can decide if I’m a
legitimate prospect or not. Zig: “Well, Chuck, I’ve always believed in
dealing in round figures and I personally am convinced that seven thousand
dollars would be enough difference to pay between those two cars [pause]
— including the taxes and costs.”
Chuck looked at me in some shock and said, “Mr. Ziglar, you ask the
impossible. First, you’re asking for a discount of $385, and then you’re
talking about taxes and costs of about $350. That’s $735, and I don’t think
there’s a chance in a million that we would even remotely entertain that
idea. [Pause.] But, Mr. Ziglar, let me ask you a question. In the unlikely
event we would accept your offer, are you prepared to drive this beautiful
new Sedan deVille home with you right now?”

He Is Serious
All of a sudden it dawned on me, “That old boy’s serious about selling
cars!” It also occurred to me that somebody (me) was a fixin’ to buy
something from somebody (him) if somebody didn’t do something!
At that precise instant, I did to Chuck what your prospects have been
doing to you all of your sales life and will continue to do to you as long as
you are in the world of selling. At the moment of truth, when I had in
essence made an offer and Chuck had given me some indication he was
going to take me up on it, I started backing away. I crayfished on him and
said, “Oh, I don’t know about that, Chuck, seven thousand dollars is an
awful lot of money, and my money just doesn’t come that easily.”

The Prospect Is Temporarily Insane
You need to understand that if the decision is a major one, at the moment
of decision, according to author Charles Roth, your prospects are
“temporarily insane.” Here’s why. On important decisions doubt and fear

invariably enter the picture. In my case I was making a seven-thousanddollar decision, which for a financial conservative is a major one.
The questions—or doubts—which started to pop into my own mind were
“Do I really want this color? Am I certain I want a Cadillac? Do I want to
buy it now or wait until the model has been out sixty or ninety days or
more? Do I want a Sedan deVille, a Fleetwood, or a Coupe deVille? Can I
get a better offer somewhere else? Am I absolutely certain I want to buy, or
would I do better to lease a car? If I hang in there, can I get a better offer
from Chuck?”
In short, there is doubt, and doubt affects your judgment, hence the
“temporarily insane” statement. Chuck pinned me down with the question
“Mr. Ziglar, if we accept your offer of seven thousand dollars, would you be
ready to go ahead?”
The major point I want to make about handling a prospect who has
doubts is this: The kind of person you are assumes at least equal importance
with the kind of salesperson you are. Before the prospect buys either your
explanations or your product, he must buy you. This means he must buy
your personality, your sincerity, and your credibility. The bottom line is he
must trust you.
At this point I would like for you to carefully notice the confidencebuilding approach taken by Chuck Bellows the man, and the sales
procedure followed by Chuck Bellows the professional salesman. I remind
you that the major reason your prospect does not buy from you is a lack of
trust (page 37). For this reason you must understand that your career in
sales started when you reached the age of accountability— not when you
picked up your first sales kit or stepped behind your first counter.

Skill—or Credibility?
In the sales process you’ve got to move from one side of the table, where
you think and feel as a salesperson, to the other side of the table, where you
think and feel as a customer. That’s what Chuck must do in this situation.
He’s got to sit in my seat, wear my shoes, and think my thoughts as a
customer. He’s got to have empathy (page 91) for my situation as a
customer if he’s going to make the sale.

Combined with this, I want you to notice the negotiation skill he
demonstrates and the sales techniques he uses as a sales pro. But again and
again I want you to understand that all the technique in the world you—or
in this case, Chuck—might use is of little or no value if the prospect doesn’t
believe what you’re saying and doesn’t have confidence in you as a person.
So what did Chuck do at this particular moment, when I started to
crayfish or back out on the counteroffer which I had made? He took his pen,
scratched the seven thousand dollars off the talking pad, and said, “Mr.
Ziglar, as a practical matter, let’s forget about the seven thousand dollars,
because I don’t think there’s a chance in a million our company would even
remotely entertain that idea. I’ll tell you what let’s do. Let’s look at the
seventy-three eighty-five, because I’m certain we would go along with that
price.” Then Chuck lowered his voice, looked me in the eye, and with just a
trace of a smile said, “Because, Mr. Ziglar, we don’t back out on our
offers.”
Mildly dangerous? Yes. But only mildly because our mutual friend had
said to Chuck, “Zig has been known to pull both legs at the same time,” so
Chuck knew he could kid me a little. When he said, “We don’t back out on
our offers,” I was amused and not offended. More importantly, I got the
message loud and clear that he was a serious negotiator and he expected me
to be serious, too.
“So,” he said, “let’s talk about this seventy-three eighty-five, Mr. Ziglar,
because according to the figures you had given me earlier [and again he’s
using his talking pad], we are offering you within twenty-six hundred
dollars of what you paid for your Oldsmobile when it was brand-new.
Actually, Mr. Ziglar, you have driven your car slightly over four years, and
if you put your pencil to it, that breaks down to a yearly cost of about six
hundred dollars a year.” (He’s showing me these figures on his talking pad.)
Then Chuck lowered his voice, looked me in the eye, and said, “And, Mr.
Ziglar, you can’t even drive a Chevrolet that cheaply!” (That made me feel
good about my previous purchase [page 179]).

The “Feel Good” Close
I thought to myself, Ziglar, you clever rascal! You’re driving that big,
high-powered Oldsmobile for just six hundred dollars a year and those

other folks have to pay that much to drive a Chevrolet! Then all of a sudden
it dawned on me exactly what he was doing. I said, “Now, Chuck, hold the
phone! Dadgone your hide, I’m not about to give you any seven thousand
three hundred eighty-five dollars for that car! I’ve offered you seven
thousand dollars and that’s it!”
Chuck has had dramatic training, I know he has! He didn’t giggle. He
didn’t even smile. He simply said, “Well, Mr. Ziglar, it’s out of my hands
[now he moves over to my side, the customer’s side, of the table and
verbally puts his arm around me], but I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I’ll talk to
the appraiser and see what I can do for you. You can rest assured I’m going
to do everything I can to help you get your car at your price, because
obviously I want you driving a car from Rodger Meier.”
Earlier Chuck had made me feel like a man of good judgment. Now he
was making me feel important. Caution: Be careful. If you can’t do this
with conviction and sincerity—don’t do it.
Chuck is using a subtle version of the assumptive key in closing which I
cover in more detail on page 357. When he said “your” car, “your” price,
and pointed out that it had cost me only six hundred dollars a year to drive
my Oldsmobile, he was taking me out of the Olds and putting me in that
Sedan deVille. He put me in the seat and behind the wheel. He had already
given me ownership.
Now watch him avoid future misunderstanding by repeating our
conversation. Chuck: “Before I go back to the appraiser, let me make
certain we are communicating. As I get the picture, you’re offering us seven
thousand dollars in exchange, provided that includes all charges.” Zig:
“That’s exactly right, Chuck.”
With that comment, Chuck headed back to see the appraiser. He was
gone only about three minutes when he came back and said, “This is a little
embarrassing, but the appraiser was called home on an emergency and he’s
not going to be back until tomorrow morning. My question is, will you be
able to sleep tonight not knowing whether or not you’re the owner of this
beautiful new Sedan deVille?”

The “Tie Down” Close

Zig: “Chuck, I think I can struggle through.” Chuck: “Now before you
go, let’s make absolutely certain we are understanding each other. [Now
watch him tie the sale down.] As you know, in the automobile business we
don’t consider it an offer unless we have a signed agreement, but I’ve been
in this business for a long time and I pride myself on being able to judge
men of quality and character. I believe, Mr. Ziglar, that when you say you
will pay seven thousand dollars in exchange for the car, if that includes
everything, that’s all the agreement I need, that your word is your bond. Am
I right on that, Mr. Ziglar?”
What do you think I’m going to say to a statement like that? What would
you have said? I’m certainly not going to say, “No, Chuck, I’m a liar.”
When someone puts you on a pedestal like that, what are you going to do?
So I said (modestly, of course), “That’s right, Chuck, if I tell you
something, you can depend on it!” Chuck: “I felt confident you were
completely dependable, so we’ll seal the deal with a gentlemen’s handshake
and I’ll give you a call first thing tomorrow morning, hopefully with some
good news for you.”
When I walked into the office the next morning at half-past eight, the
telephone was ringing. Chuck was calling and he was motivated. “Mr.
Ziglar, I’ve got fantastic news for you! I just talked to the appraiser and
we’re going to be able to swap with you for just seventy-two hundred
dollars, including everything.” At that precise instant I knew I had bought
the car for seven thousand dollars.

Compromise Leads to—Compromise
As we say down home, “You can put this in your little pipe and smoke
it.”

When a company or an individual compromises one time, whether
it’s on price or principle, the next compromise is right around the
corner.
Zig: “Chuck, last night I was impressed with your insight and wisdom in
giving me credit for my integrity. I thought you were ‘right on,’ and since I

am a man of my word, I will do exactly what I said I would.” Chuck: “Mr.
Ziglar, are you saying that you will go no more than the seven thousand?”
Zig: “Chuck, we’re not eyeballing but we are communicating. That’s it.”
Chuck: “I’ll be back to you in a couple of minutes.” He called me back and
asked, “Do you want me to bring it to you, or are you going to come over
here and get it?” Zig: “Chuck, I like to have my cars delivered to me.”
Chuck: “I’ll see you in a few minutes.”
Two major points as we conclude the story: Number one, when I started
to back out of my seven-thousand-dollar offer, Chuck did not try to resell
me. He knew I’d try to get the price even lower if he did. Point number two:
Even though I met Chuck for the first time the day before I bought the car,
he actually started selling me that car twenty-two years earlier when he
made the decision he was going to make his career selling Cadillac
automobiles.
In order to do this, Chuck knew he had to do two things. First, he knew
he had to build customer loyalty so he could sell the same people time after
time. Second, he knew he had to persuade his customers to send him other
customers. How well he has succeeded is evidenced by the fact that the
bulk of his business is repeat business. This is truly remarkable when you
understand that we live in a highly mobile society and many of his
customers relocate in other cities. My own purchase was initially motivated
by one of Chuck’s long-term customers.
How he does this is important. Number one, he has built his career on
integrity. In my own case, I did not go see Chuck to look at a Cadillac. I had
already looked at Cadillacs at two other dealerships. I was sold on the car. I
went to see Chuck to buy a car if we could work out the financial details. I
knew I could trust Chuck, and trust is the most important ingredient in the
transaction. Number two, Chuck is extremely professional in his followthrough. Ten days after purchase, he called to see how I liked the car, if he
could do anything for me, and, “Oh, yes, do you have any friends I should
talk to about our new model?”
The first time I was in for service, the first man I saw, almost before I
switched the engine off, was Chuck Bellows, wanting to know if he could
do anything for me. That’s not all. Periodically Chuck would call just to
say, “Hello, and by the way, do you know anybody who . . . ?” Obviously,

he was keeping his name fresh in my mind so when car-swapping time
rolled around I would remember him.
Chuck Bellows is a professional. Neatly and conservatively dressed at all
times, he creates the image of a friend and adviser who wants to assist you
in selecting the right car for you and then work to help you enjoy your
selection. That’s good selling. That’s the way to make every sale so you
make more than a sale. You make a customer and a friend. This is the way
to sell more now and sell more later. That, my friend, is career-building
selling.

19
Everybody Is a Salesperson
and Everything Is Selling
This Dentist Is a Professional Salesman. One of the true professionals in
selling is my friend Dr. Tom McDougal. Tom is a dentist, and a superb one.
He lectures nationally to other dentists on building a successful practice.
Like all real professionals, Tom practices what he preaches.
On my first visit, the receptionist at the front desk was cordial, friendly,
and enthusiastic. An assistant handed me the new-patient forms and
encouraged me to take a seat in the reception room. Almost immediately
after I completed them, another assistant came to take me into a treatment
room for the preliminary examination.
From “hello” to “good-bye,” all of them were enthusiastic and
professional in what they did. Dr. McDougal, of course, handled the parts of
the treatment that only a dentist can handle, but the staff members did their
jobs in a professional way. Perhaps the most impressive part of the visit was
the fact that not one, not two, but three of them “sold” me on the
importance of using dental floss. Each one laughingly said that Dr.
McDougal believes you should floss “only those teeth you want to keep.”
The point is simple: He believes in preventive dentistry. I left with the
strong feeling that everybody there wanted me to keep my teeth. That’s
practicing good dentistry and good human relations, and it’s fantastic
service selling.

Words Do Make a Difference

When I visited Dr. McDougal I noticed he used positive words. Many of
these words are taken from the extensive list prepared by dental consultant
Gladys E. Cook.
He talked about “restoration” instead of “filling”and about a “change in
schedule” rather than any “cancellation” or “postponement.” I was in his
“reception room” briefly, not his “waiting room.” At the end of the visit
they wanted to know how I would “take care of,” not “pay for,” the
services. His office called my office to “confirm” or to “verify” the
appointment, not to “remind” me of it. I was told to “empty my mouth,” not
to “spit.” They “prepared” the tooth instead of “grinding” the tooth. He
gave me an “injection” instead of a “needle” or “shot.” I felt a little
“discomfort” or “pressure,” not any “pain.” Yes, sir, words are important.
They do make a difference!

Oooops!
Two other things stand out in the relationship. First, two nights later one
of the temporary crowns came off. I called Dr. McDougal’s office and the
answering service responded. Five minutes later my phone was ringing and
ten minutes later I was on my way to the office, where one of Dr.
McDougal’s associates quickly cemented the temporary back in place.
That’s taking care of your patient (customer).
Second, since Dr. McDougal prepared three teeth for crowns, the visit
was lengthy and the work extensive. That evening he personally called me
to inquire as to how I was doing. Did I need a prescription? Was I
comfortable? Could he be of any help to me? In all the years I’ve been
going to dentists, I have never had a single one call me at home to see how I
was and ask if I was hurting.
To be candid, I initially thought he was calling because he knew me
professionally as a speaker and writer. I checked with other patients of his,
however, and discovered that any time he does a significant amount of work
on a patient, he always calls him that night to make certain he’s doing OK.
That’s good dentistry—but, friends, from where I’m sitting, that’s also good
selling, because that showed me his care and concern for me as a person.
Dr. Hugh Russell from Atlanta, Georgia, points out that often people will
buy from us not because they understand our offer but because they feel we

understand them. In Dr. McDougal’s case, I will buy from him because he’s
a superb dentist and because he understands me and my needs when I sit
down in his chair. Every professional salesman should be just that
concerned and just that professional in looking after his customers.
This is best verbalized by Dr. McDougal himself in this paragraph which
he contributed:
The real secret to “selling” in dentistry or in any other profession or business is to speak
from the heart instead of from the head or intellectual base. When the inner man speaks,
the deepest form of sincerity is communicated. However, one cannot speak from the
heart unless he truly believes in his product and/or service. This means that he must have
paid the price by obtaining profound knowledge of his product or service. One must also
believe this product/service is unquestionably what the customer/patient needs.

Dr. McDougal is not a “salesman” or “sales trainer” in the eyes of the
public at large, but as a salesman you will never read a paragraph any more
loaded with sales impact than the preceding one.

A Professional Service Station Operator
Several years ago, when service stations were service stations and not
just stands with pumps that you use to fill your own tank, I met Tom
Fountain, one of the supersalesmen of our time.
Never will I forget the day I pulled into his station in Decatur, Georgia,
with an empty tank. Rain was coming down in sheets as I pulled up to the
gas pump, hopped out, and made a mad dash into the station, signaling the
attendant not to come out and get soaked because I was not in a big hurry.
I introduced myself to the owner and started the conversation with an
untypically negative comment. “Tom, this rain is really tough on the service
station business, isn’t it?” Tom very cheerfully replied, “No, Zig, not at all.
As a matter of fact, this is one of the greatest things that happens to me.”

The “Rainy Weather” Close
I responded that in all my years I’d never heard a service station owner
get enthusiastic about rain, and I asked him why he said that. He replied,
“Well, Zig, while it’s raining it is true that my business slows down, but
when we have a real gullywasher like this it washes hundreds of nails and
pieces of glass into the street, and you’re going to see a rash of flat tires
during the next few days.

“Now don’t misunderstand, Zig, I hate to see anyone have bad luck, but
it’s a fact of life that when nails and glass hit the street people are going to
run over them. And it also happens, Zig, that I have the greatest tire
repairmen in this city, and we can do the best and fastest job at the best
price of anybody here. That’s the reason people come to us. There’s nothing
I can do about the rain falling, but there is a lot I can do about solving
people’s problems when that rain does fall.” Wow! Was that ever a
delightful visit! With an attitude like that no wonder Tom’s business was
booming!

The “Spare” Close
On another visit into his station we were discussing sales strategy, and
Tom shared a fantastic procedure he uses for bonus sales.
When a car pulls into the station, Tom and his crew check the oil, battery,
and water as well as the fan belt. When the fan belt is worn and in danger of
breaking, Tom says to the owner of the car, “Sir, your fan belt is worn. If
you’ll get the spare one out of your trunk, I’ll be glad to put it on and it
shouldn’t delay you but just a minute.”
Invariably the owner will say, “I don’t have one in my trunk.” Then Tom
responds, “If you’ll take a look, you’ll notice this one is badly worn. I
would really encourage you to get a new one, because yours could break at
any minute and you might be stuck in a bad spot.” The owner, in an
extremely high percentage of the cases, agrees to do so.
I’ll bet you’ve already finished the story, haven’t you? When Tom comes
out of the station, he is carrying not one but two belts. He not only sells the
one belt but in a high percentage of the cases he also sells the second belt.
That’s the mark of the professional. That’s serving by selling—or is it
selling by serving?

The Coach Is a Salesman
Everybody sells. And to repeat what Red Motley, the former editor of
Parade magazine, said many years ago, “Nothing happens until somebody
sells something.” Never will I forget that hot summer day in 1943 when I
walked into the American history class being taught by Coach Joby Harris
at Hinds Community College in Raymond, Mississippi. I was there under

protest. I had to have the course in history in order to get my high school
diploma, but as far as I was concerned it was a complete waste of time.
What possible good would it do me to know what happened fifty years ago,
a hundred years ago, two hundred years ago?
I entered the class with the attitude that I would take the class—and I
would pass it—because I would learn just enough to “get by.” My real
interest was in getting the course out of the way so I could take additional
math and science courses the following fall in order to qualify for the Naval
Air Corps. My dream for several years had been to fly one of the fighter
planes. We were in the midst of World War II in that summer of 1943, and I
was really gung ho about doing my share. At the ripe old age of sixteen I
clearly knew what I wanted to do with my life.
When I walked into the classroom that day, I expected the teacher to
introduce himself, make a few light remarks, and get on with the business
of teaching us history. The first part was right. Coach Harris introduced
himself, made a few casual remarks, and then made one of the most
professional sales presentations I have ever heard. By the time the “sales
talk” was over, I clearly understood why I absolutely had to know my
history. As a matter of fact, before the end of that first hour, I was a history
major. Not only did I make an A in the class, but it was the only subject in
which I consistently made As for most of the rest of my academic career.
Considerably more important is the fact that what Coach Harris said to
me that day influenced the rest of my life. My interest in politics, in social
conditions, and in doing as much as I can to make our country a better place
to live can be traced directly to that first hour in the history class of Coach
Joby Harris.
Since every teacher is a salesperson, wouldn’t it be great if we could sell
every teacher on the idea that they truly are salespeople, that they need to
sell and can sell our young people the concepts which made our country
great, that they need to sell the students on the idea of doing their best and
being their best, to sell them on reaching for higher objectives and making
bigger contributions? With this approach, I believe the youth of today will
be far more productive in their world of tomorrow.

Professional Builders Sell, Too

As I’ve said on a half-dozen different occasions in Secrets, everyone
from the housewife and mother to the professional computer technician is a
salesperson. The same is certainly true of builders. In 1981 we initiated an
action which had been in our plans for a number of years.
We bought a lot at Holly Lake, which is a pleasant two-hour drive east of
Dallas, Texas. It had been my long-range dream to reduce my speaking
engagements and concentrate more on writing. My personal objective is to
positively influence the maximum number of people. I can do this more
effectively through my books than I can through personal appearances.
We found in Holly Lake what we considered the ideal location because it
was secluded, quiet, and beautiful. After buying the lot we had to decide on
a builder. We only talked to one man—his name is Bill Tenison. From the
beginning Bill’s words and actions indicated that he expected to build our
house (“Assumptive” Close). Bill had many things going for him, including
an easy, friendly, professional manner and his reputation.
When we bought our lot we met the next-door neighbors who were in the
process of completing their home. They told us there was only one builder
to consider, and Bill was that man.
They enthusiastically pointed out that Bill did superb work, was a man of
integrity, and did everything he said he was going to do and then some. We
talked to people for whom Bill had built a couple of years earlier. They said
exactly the same thing. Bill was understandably eager to take us to inspect
homes currently under construction as well as those he had built several
years before.
The general feeling in the community is that Bill Tenison builds every
house so that he can be good neighbors and friends with all his customers.
Since Bill was in the process of building his own house at the lake and was
going to be fishing and playing golf with all or most of his neighbors, his
approach is certainly a wise one. (Can you imagine trying to play golf with
fifty angry clients?)

So How Did He Do?
I can honestly say that Bill delivered far more house than I thought we
were buying. I know little or nothing about building, but person after person

familiar with the industry assured me that Bill had used far more insulation
than was required in the specifications and that he added extra
reinforcement which was not called for. On countless occasions he used 3"
x 6" boards when standard practice dictated 2" x 4".
As the house was going up, since we could not be there for every phase
of the construction, Bill voluntarily took dozens of pictures and sent them to
us. This not only enabled us to watch the growth of the house but satisfied
us completely that we were getting everything we had bargained for—and
then some.
The point really is clear. Bill knew that when his men drove the last nail
into our house he was laying the groundwork for driving the first nail in all
the other houses his satisfied customers are going to sell for him. As a
professional, Bill is intelligently selfish enough to know that if he does a
superb job, delivers more than he’s paid for, and satisfies me as a customer,
I’m going to be telling people like you that if you ever build a house at
Holly Lake, Bill Tenison is the man who should build it. That, my selling
friend, is what building a sales career is all about.
Since you don’t let a beautiful home sit empty, this story has a sequel,
and it’s at least partially tied to what the late sales trainer J. Douglas
Edwards called the “Puppy Dog” Close.

The “Puppy Dog” Close
This close is simple and undoubtedly got its start—or at least its
popularity—from the early days when youngsters lured their parents into a
pet shop “just to look” at that “doggy in the window” (for those of you who
are old enough to remember that song). If the youngster and the pet-shop
owner could not gang up on Mom and Dad and persuade them to buy that
cute puppy, then the owner encouraged them to take the puppy home to see
how they liked it. You can complete the story, can’t you? The most
important point is the pet-shop owner let his product (the puppy) sell itself.
That’s good strategy.

Interior Designers Sell, Too
When Bill Tenison finished our home at Holly Lake, interior designer
Joyce Wynn and her beautiful staff (especially Kathy Adcock-Smith, who

did a tremendous job of looking everywhere to find exactly what we
needed) worked carefully with the Redhead and me to make certain it was
furnished appropriately and according to our tastes and desires.
Never will I forget what happened when virtually everything was
complete except for a large empty space on one of the walls in the great
room. Frankly, I thought it looked fine as it was, but Joyce brought in a
beautiful wall rug to fill the spot. As you might suspect, it wasn’t exactly
bargain-basement material. I liked it but there were some reservations about
buying it. Joyce casually suggested that we hang it on a temporary basis and
see if it “grew” on us. If it did, that would be fine; if not, no problem.
That made a certain amount of sense, even to this stubborn husband. It
wasn’t until that afternoon while I was jogging that I realized she had used
the old “Puppy Dog” Close on me. It was almost all I could do to keep from
laughing, because it demonstrates exactly what I’m talking about.
Good technique works (yes, I bought the wall rug) even when the person
you’re using it on is educated in sales techniques and procedures. Actually,
if it’s really good, the prospect is not completely aware of what is
happening. Even if he is, if the need and desire for ownership are there and
the salesperson’s techniques are professional, there simply isn’t a great deal
you can or want to do about it. Remember: The prospect wants his problem
solved.
The professional is so effective you “forget” he or she is a pro. About a
year after we moved into our home at Holly Lake, the Redhead and I were
visiting with Kathy Adcock-Smith. My wife was sharing with her that many
people have remarked how they love the warmth of our home. She also
commented that some had expressed surprise that an interior designer had
helped us, because the home looked so “natural” and livable, whereas many
interior designers have a tendency to make homes look artificial and
overdone. These comments obviously delighted Kathy, because she knew
she had done her job well, that she had “sold” us her furniture, accessories,
and ideas so well they had blended completely with our tastes, ideas, and
concepts so that her expertise had given our home a beautiful added
dimension.

The conversation reminded me of an early experience I had in the sales
world. After consummating a sale for a set of cookware, I was getting
prospects from my new customers. As I sought the prospects, I assured
them I would simply demonstrate, and if their friends chose to buy, that was
fine, and if they did not choose to buy, that was fine, too. To this statement
the wife responded, “Yes, I know that is true because you’re definitely not
much of a salesman.”
Since she had just given me a check for the largest set of cookware our
company made, I was delighted with her comment. In the customer’s mind
she had bought and I had not sold. Ideally, that’s the way every prospect
should feel at the end of the transaction.

It Works on Million-Dollar Deals, Too
Several years ago, when the corporation was small compared to what it is
today, an aircraft salesman called on Rich DeVos, the president of The
Amway Corporation, to sell him a jet airplane. Rich is quite conservative
and felt the corporation could not justify the purchase at that time. The
salesman knew what the jet would do in saving time as well as wear and
tear on Rich’s body. He also knew the plane would enable Rich to see more
of his distributors and substantially increase his effectiveness.
Here’s the approach the salesman used: “Mr. DeVos, we have one special
jet aircraft which would be ideal for you, and I would like to take you for a
demonstration ride.” With some reluctance but also with some excitement,
Rich took the ride. He liked it but was by no means convinced he should
buy, so the salesman said, “Mr. DeVos, we’re not going to be using this
plane this week, so we want you to take it and use it as if it were your own.
Obviously, there is no obligation.” A deal like that is difficult to turn down
since he emphasized there would be no obligation on Amway’s part. As
luck would have it, Rich just happened to have an especially difficult week,
with much travel in front of him. During that week Rich flew around the
country in that jet faster, more comfortably, and more productively.
At the end of the week the salesman came back and tried to close the
sale, but Rich was still not convinced the move would be prudent, so the
salesman extended the “Puppy Dog” offer with a small string attached. “Mr.
DeVos, since we have no specific plans for the jet this next month, why

don’t you just lease it for the month and continue to use it as if it were your
own?” This time Rich was even more hesitant, but the salesman persisted,
so Rich made even better use of the plane for the entire month.
By the end of the month Rich was “hooked,” so when the salesman came
back for “his” jet, Rich DeVos looked at him and asked, “What do you
mean, your jet?” (By then Rich had grown accustomed to the extra speed
and convenience, and it’s tough to give up any satisfying convenience,
especially if you can justify it in any way.) In essence, Rich had no trouble
talking himself into an investment which would enable him to serve his
corporation more effectively.
He bought the jet because the salesman was able to demonstrate the value
of his product. In a nutshell, he let his product demonstrate that it would
make Rich more effective in fulfilling his corporate responsibilities, so in
the truest sense the product “sold itself” after the salesman used the “Puppy
Dog” Close.

The Waiter Is a Salesman
Frank Infante was born and raised in Cuba, but when Castro and his
Communist cohorts took over, he, along with other members of his family,
made his exit to the United States. I met Frank for the first time one evening
when the Redhead and I were having dinner at Farfallo’s Restaurant in
Dallas and had the good fortune to have Frank as our waiter. He’s the best
I’ve ever seen. He’s thoroughly professional in his every move and is well
versed in all the niceties of being a superb waiter. He speaks the language,
knows the words, and has the grace, charm, and good manners that are vital
to good service. He’s extremely sensitive to the diner and his every need
without smothering him with unwanted, unneeded attention.
Each time he serves us Frank starts by greeting us with a friendly, lowkey welcome. After we’ve had a reasonable amount of time to look over the
menu, Frank—with that innate sixth sense of his—approaches at what
seems to be the precise moment we’ve arrived at our decision. He smilingly
asks if we are ready to order. Generally speaking, there’s a little small talk. I
always ask about the specialties, and in glowing but not too detailed terms
Frank tells us about them. I ask for his recommendation and he seldom

hedges. He knows our tastes and will say, “I believe you would enjoy this
particular dish. It’s very nice.”
However, since we are fairly traditional and there are three or four dishes
we particularly enjoy, we generally order the Veal Oscar, Red Snapper
Sauce Bretonne, or Coeur de Filet Helder (Filet Mignon with Béarnaise
Sauce). His description of the salads is also quite elaborate and yet not too
lengthy. In other words, he’s inclined to “tell us what time it is and not how
to build a watch.”

The “Soft Service Sell” Close
It’s amazing to me that Frank can bring us exactly what we want so
quickly when we’re somewhat pushed for time and yet time everything to
perfection so that we can have a leisurely dinner when it’s just the two of
us. The tea and coffee are always available and ready; the hot bread is at our
fingertips; we never wait more than a minute or so when we’ve completed
one course and are ready to move to the next.
As we finish our meal, Frank asks about dessert and we generally say no.
Often, with a twinkle in his eye he will say to us that the cheesecake is
particularly good or the cappuccino pie is especially nice and if we split one
it would not be too heavy for us. His close is “soft,” it’s service oriented,
and it works. One reason it works is that Frank is truly a “team player” who
works with his “busboy” (that’s a horrible title which the restaurant industry
must change in order to help attract more quality people) in a most effective
manner. He treats him with respect and courtesy as he requests assistance
instead of demanding it. That’s class.
From “hello” to “good-bye” Frank Infante is selling. He’s doing it in a
pleasant, low-key, and very professional way, but he is selling. He
recognizes that his income is directly related to the effectiveness and
manner in which he serves. However, as you watch Frank and listen to him,
you get the distinct feeling that his entire reason for being there is to be the
best at his profession. His objective is to make your meal a true dining
experience. Needless to say, we never tip Frank just the standard amount.
As you probably know, the original word was TIPS and it was “To Insure
Prompt Service.” The tip was given before the meal as a reward in advance
for the prompt service. The Redhead and I figure the standard amount is for

prompt, courteous service. When we get a “bonus” in the form of helpful
suggestions, gracious manners, a pleasant smile, and some friendly
enthusiasm, we’re inclined to reward our benefactors with more.
It’s a shame that every waiter and waitress can’t have Frank Infante serve
them a meal. I’m convinced that if they could, and if they were truly
interested in becoming more professional, many of them could increase
their incomes from 50 to 150 percent almost immediately.
Question: What would you do with this extra income? Answer: You
probably could figure it out for yourself, but Frank Infante invested in his
own restaurant and is doing well.
One of the mysteries of life is why any waiter or waitress (or any other
salesperson) doesn’t understand that all they’ve really got to sell is their
attitude and their service. If they would learn some of the simple niceties of
being gracious, pleasant, enthusiastic, and helpful, their income would
increase dramatically. Yes, a good waitperson is a good salesperson.

The Three-Year-Old Pro
When it comes to selling, no one—but no one—is as persuasive or
effective as a small child. Conviction is total, integrity is beyond question,
and enthusiasm is unlimited. Now throw in a completely open manner,
combined with the right words, and you have an unbeatable persuader.
Never will I forget an incident with Suzan, my oldest daughter, when she
was just three years old. Cindy, our second daughter, had made her
appearance just six weeks earlier, and I had been on the road much of the
time the previous three weeks. I pulled into our driveway in Knoxville,
Tennessee, slightly before noon on that cold, snowy February Saturday.
After my welcome home from the Redhead, Suzan, Cindy, and our live-in
housekeeper, Lizzie Rogers, I was informed that I needed to go to the store
to “pick up some things.”
Since I was playing with Suzan and holding the baby while talking to the
Redhead about the trip, I wasn’t exactly thrilled at the prospect of going
back out in the cold. However, those “things” were essential, so I
reluctantly started putting on my topcoat, hat, and gloves. As I was getting
ready, Suzan started asking if she could go. I explained that the weather was

just too bad to take her out, and besides, I would be gone only a few
minutes. She responded, “But, Daddy, I’ll be so lonely.” Zig: “Suzan, you
know you won’t be lonely. Your mother, your little sister, and Lizzie are all
here, so you certainly won’t be lonely.” Suzan: “But, Daddy, I’ll be lonely
for you.”
It really wasn’t a fair fight. I was badly overmatched and never had a
chance. Obviously, Suzan didn’t know anything about “dominant buying
motive” or the importance of making the prospect feel important (and really
meaning it), but no sales pro with thirty years’ experience could have come
up with a better line. Needless to say, I didn’t want Suzan to be “lonely,” so
she made the trip.

The Winner and Undisputed Champion
One of the really great professional salespeople in America was the late
Billie Engman, who sold for the Saladmaster Corporation out of Dallas,
Texas. At the time of her death, Billie had set and held more individual
sales records than anyone in the history of the company. She sold the
complete product line of cookware, china, cutlery, crystal, and flatware.
Toward the end of her career she was selling to the daughters of the girls
she sold to when she started her career with the company in 1950.
Billie was one of those ladies with a truly professional concept and
philosophy. She was incredibly well organized and was an extremely hard,
persistent, and consistent worker. When she was out “beating the bushes,”
she had great singleness of purpose.

She’s a Sales “Psychologist”
Let’s look at some of her concepts, ideas, and philosophies. To begin
with, she mildly objected to the use of the term closing the sale. She
explained that she thought of closing as someone closing the door and
shutting someone out. She felt that when she opened her sample case of
products and opened her storehouse of information which she shared with
the prospect, she was really opening the sale instead of closing the sale.
Billie had some keen insights into human nature and the impact we can
all have on one another if we will but take time to learn. Despite her
phenomenal success, she was extremely modest and felt that her role as a

salesperson gave her the privilege and opportunity to serve. That modesty
was best demonstrated by the fact that she had not reported her sales for
several years. Not reporting cost her a considerable number of substantial
prizes and the resulting publicity that was part of the package, but Billie
preferred to stay out of the limelight and serve her clients.
According to a company official and her husband, Hal, who worked with
her and was understandably proud of her, Billie sold so much more than
anyone else that her major competition was with herself and her records.
Like the professional golfer whose real competition is the golf course itself,
Billie could tell you exactly what she sold this same week last year. She
reached her goal to improve sales for the same time period so consistently
that almost without exception each year was better than last year. She
understood that over the years there had been several recessions. She
admitted that any talk about recession frightened her, so she got out and
worked harder so that her volume of business would continue to climb
instead of start to decline. Now that’s a great attitude!

She’s a Smart Lady
Her sales psychology included getting the entire family involved in a
presentation, because approximately 60 percent of her business was with
families and only 40 percent with single girls. Initially she had a great fear
of selling to men but soon learned they were actually easier to sell than
women. If a small child was present for the presentation, she involved that
child and made each member of the family feel important.
One thing she did to psychologically gear the prospect for the sale was to
eliminate tension or feelings of being “closed in” on the part of the
prospect. When the closing process started, if she observed the prospect
getting nervous and uptight, she asked him to get her a drink of water. As
she explained, it’s amazing what that brief interlude will do for the nerves
of the prospect.
Billie never used the telephone to make appointments. She believed the
telephone was a fast way to burn up a lot of qualified prospects and
believed the telephone put a lot of direct sales people out of business,
especially in direct sales. She dropped in on her leads. She didn’t alert them

to her coming and give them the opportunity to think of reasons not to buy.
Direct selling is a face-to-face business—not an ear-to-ear business.
Billie kept meticulous records and took great delight in tracing her
customers into the second generation. She grouped her leads into areas, and
when she left home it was with the sole purpose of seeing as many prospects
as she possibly could. (Like all sales pros, she was action oriented and goal
directed.) She carried her sample case to the door so if the prospect was
home she had everything needed to make a presentation. This procedure
eliminated any loss of momentum or a chance the prospect might change
his mind during the few minutes required to go to the car and get her
samples. Since she went to the door expecting to get in, it would be
inconsistent not to carry the sample case. Billie was low key and was not
seen as a threat to the people she dealt with.
Billie’s sales were probably larger than those of anyone else in the
cookware and table-appointments field. Frequently her orders ran as much
as $2,500, and sales of $4,000 and even $5,000 occurred with amazing
regularity.

Each Prospect Is Different
Billie geared her presentation to each individual prospect. Though she
gave each one the same basic facts as they related to the product, she
recognized that the single girl who will perhaps always be single has
different interests from the girl who plans to get married, who also is
different from the married couple. She personalized the use of the product
to a large degree. She used what she called the “mirror of the future” and
projected the prospects using and enjoying the beauty and practicality of her
products not just in their own lifetime but in the lifetime of their children
and even their grandchildren.
She noted with considerable pride that the china and especially the
sterling silver which she sold to her prospects thirty years earlier was worth
a great deal more now than it was when they bought it. She felt that during
the years ahead the customers who were investing now would be equally
fortunate.
Billie was up-to-date on her current events. She tied her prospect’s needs
to current stories and used that information as a tool or sales prop for

getting immediate action. She sold on love, caring, sharing, and
togetherness and the fact that her products contributed to all of those things.
She used warm selling words as she discussed her program with her
prospects. Words like rich, loving, good taste, gracious, comfort, security,
investment, caring, and many other positive words were a part of her, so
they were a natural part of her vocabulary. The lowest word on her saleslanguage totem pole was the word pitch. She contended—and I completely
agree—that the professional never uses that word.

The “Total” Saleslady
Billie firmly believed you open/close (“open” is Billie’s term) the sale by
the way you dress, by the neatness of your accessories and attire, by the
way you smile, the way you walk, and even the kind of car you drive. She
didn’t believe in being flashy for fear the prospect might think she was
being “too” successful, and though Billie could have driven a new
Mercedes and made her sales calls dressed in mink, she prudently bought
fine-quality materials, drove a more-than-adequate car, and gave the
appearance of the quiet, confident success she was.
She never discussed with her prospects how long she had been selling
(she started in 1948). She felt this would brand her as a person who was
“trying to sell somebody something,” when in fact she wanted to be
regarded as a friend and counselor whose function was to help them make
the best possible investment for the future.
She felt the increasing use of catalog buying was a real asset to her
because people could see and recognize that you could buy quality
merchandise without having to go shopping to do so. She had the added
advantage of being able to show and demonstrate her product with the
personal presentation and letting the prospect see, feel, and examine what
she was selling.
Billie collected many testimonial letters and constantly updated the ones
she had. What a new happy customer said about her product was a strong
supplement to what her customers of ten years ago had to say. When she
brought out some of the “oldies,” it was to let the prospect know that an
investment of this type was not a new idea, that years ago investors were
doing exactly the same thing she was trying to get them to do that day, and

that yes, she really was offering a provable lifetime investment. (Conviction
is essential to closing.)

This “Partially” Explains Her Success
There are many reasons Billie Engman did such an incredible volume of
business. I’ve already touched on some of those reasons, but there are three
others that were as much a part of Billie Engman as breathing. First, Billie
expected to sell everyone she called on. Not only did she expect to sell
them, but she expected to sell them a large order the first time and an even
larger repeat order the second time.
Second, Billie felt the order was the result of making a presentation, so
she considered the “close” a natural part of that presentation. She gave
everyone she called on a chance to buy by asking for the order. If that
sounds elementary, may I remind you that sales trainer Chris Hegarty points
out that 63 percent of all sales interviews end with no specific invitation to
buy.
Third, Billie kept records on all her customers. She knew exactly what
they bought, when they bought, and how they paid for it. She planned her
call-back and prepared the prospect for that callback when she made the
original sale. Equally important, she prepared herself for the follow-up call.
She knew the initial order firmly established the trust of the buyer and put
her in the position of being able to help the customer even more on the
second sale.

The “Accessory” Close
Billie’s callback was something else. Before she called back to complete
the order, she carefully checked the initial order. Then she prepared three
“accessory” offers. Her first offer was the “impossible” one. It was so big,
so complete, so comprehensive, and so expensive there was no way the
prospect could or would buy it. It was truly a dream proposal in that most
people would only dream of owning so many beautiful table appointments.
Fortunately for Billie and the customer, many of them didn’t realize they
couldn’t have the biggest and the best, so they went ahead and bought the
“impossible” dream order. As a pro, Billie challenged her customers to “go
for the gold,” to strive for the best, to reach their “impossible” dream, and

the prospects responded. It’s a fact: Customer performance is often tied
directly to the salesperson’s expectancy. Billie’s expectancy was always
high.
The second accessory order Billie prepared was also beautiful and
substantial. It was a big order, designed to perfectly complement the
original one. The “average” salesperson would be thrilled to make sales this
size, but there was nothing average about Billie. This was her most popular
reorder, partly because it was the “middle” offer and partly because
realistically, more people could afford it.
The third accessory order which Billie prepared in minute detail to
complement the initial order was still a substantial order but was obviously
smaller than the first two proposals. After looking at the first two proposals,
many prospects who initially felt they “couldn’t afford” anything became
enthusiastic buyers of the “minimum” order and at a later date followed up
with a third and even a fourth order.
VERY IMPORTANT: On the follow-up call to sell accessories, Billie
treated the call as a full-fledged sales and service call. She gave the
customer the “full treatment” and then some. She resold herself. She resold
the company. She resold the products. She resold the concept of investing
for the future. She sold the idea of taking action today—not tomorrow. She
had her customer get out her original order so she could check it over. Then
Billie either bragged on the customer for taking such excellent care of the
merchandise or gently suggested how she could take better care of it and
receive even more benefits. All the time she was reselling herself and her
products.
She had two legitimate reasons for being there. Number one was the
service call, and since Billie had written the customer a thank-you letter
immediately after the first sale and had sent him Christmas cards in
between, she stood there as a friend. Number two was the fact that the
company had a special sale which Billie knew the customer was going to be
excited about. Needless to say, she was almost never turned away on those
follow-through calls.

Wish I Had Known This

I personally believe that if I had known this procedure when I was in the
business, my income would have been at least 50 percent greater because
my customers would have benefited a great deal more. Incidentally, in case
you are wondering about Billie’s cancellation and delinquency records, it’s
a fact that her cancellation was extremely low and her delinquency rate for
nonpayment was the lowest in the company at that time.
Will this procedure work for others? You betcha! Over the years, in
addition to her own sales, which put her in first place, Billie trained
numerous others who finished in the top ten nationally. “Will it work for
me?” Only if you use it. Techniques, procedures, and ideas have no feelings
and don’t really care who uses them.
One of the real mysteries of life is why more salespeople who work in
stores don’t “go direct” and generate more business by developing
customers who are loyal to them and their stores. Example: In our over
fifty-six years of housekeeping, the Redhead and I have never once been
solicited to buy a house, diamonds, furs, furniture, or appliances. Doyle
Hoyer, who sold me my clothes (pages 393–95), and Chuck Bellows, who
sold me a car, are a couple of the precious few who have ever followed
through with service and solicitation for future business. During our years
together we have bought four homes, more than thirty-five cars, counting
company vehicles, and four complete households of furniture and
appliances, not counting dozens of major individual items. We’ve spent
thousands of dollars on jewelry and furs, but nobody ever tries to sell us
those items. They don’t even make a serious effort to get us back in their
stores!
Question: If you sell any of these items, are you seeking business or do
you just wait for the business to seek you? When you make the initial sale,
do you follow through to make certain your customer is satisfied with this
purchase and plant the seeds for the next one? In athletics the followthrough is critical. The golfer, pitcher, kicker, boxer must follow through for
maximum results. In selling the salesman must follow through with service
and reminders to buy if he’s going to keep his customers (once you sell
them you should feel as if they are yours) and build a career.

Point: If anyone makes a “significant” purchase from you, you
should put him on your “super customer” list and “court” him as
long as you represent the same company or sell the same basic
product line.
In many ways Billie Engman was the epitome of what I speak about
throughout this segment. She did all the right things, took all the steps,
learned her lessons, was a constant student, was resourceful and
imaginative, had the highest integrity, was absolutely dependable, was an
exceptionally hard worker, and was loyal to her principles, to her company,
to her customers, and most of all to her own sense of what was fair and
right. She truly was a credit to the profession.
Question: How do you sum up or in a nutshell explain Billie Engman?
Answer: You don’t, but if you could, you would start with love. She loved
her family, her products, her company, and her customers. She wanted the
best for all of them. Then you move to commitment. She committed to do
the best possible job and utilize her talents and abilities to the maximum by
utilizing every moment to the fullest. Finally, she saw herself as a person
who was going to deserve (serve is the major part of deserve) the big sale,
do the big job, earn the big rewards. She knew that was the way her
customers, her family, her company, and her country would also win big.
She was truly a sales pro.

PART 4

Imagination and Word Pictures
OBJECTIVES
To open your mind to the importance of developing your imagination for
a substantial increase in your sales.
To teach you twenty-four specific closes, some of which you can adapt
and use in your daily sales life.
To sell you on the value of learning how to use the verbal paintbrush to
paint pictures of future customer enjoyment to help you sell more
today.
CLOSES AND/OR PROCEDURES
The “1902” Close Revisited
The “Tightwad” Close
The “Diagram” Close
The “20/20” Close
The “Action Now” Close
The “No Procedure” Close
The “Marriage” Close
The “Imagination” Close
The “Click” Close
The “Special Occasion” Close
The “Tuit” Close
The “Challenge” Close
The “Twenty-Nine-Day” Close

The “Front Line” Close
The “Opportunity” Close
The “Companion” Close
The “Nice People” Close
The “Cokes and Smokes” Close
The “Corner” Close
The “Time Utilization” Close
The “Question” Close
The “Picture” Close
The “Preparation” Close
The “Fear” Close
The “Postselling” Close
The “Repetition” Close
The “Menu” Close
The “Oooh and Aaah” Close

20
Imagination in Selling
According to my good friend and fellow sales trainer Merle Fraser, in the
next twenty-four hours your prospect’s heart will beat 103,689 times. His
blood will travel 168,000 miles; his lungs will inhale 23,240 times; he’ll eat
three and a half pounds of food; he’ll exercise only 7 million of his 9 billion
brain cells. He’ll speak 4,800 words of which 3,200 involve something
about himself and not a single one will be about you or your products or
services unless you figure out a way to involve him emotionally with your
sales presentation. The only way you’re going to get your share of his
attention and his words is to use that imagination to make yourself a part of
his world.
One of the most exciting things I can say to you about the world of
selling is that most prospects really do not want to say no. The reason they
don’t want to say no is that no is so final. It ends the relationship. So rather
than saying no, many prospects will say everything from “I want to think
about it” to “I’ve got to talk to my lawyer, wife, husband, C.P.A., etc.” This
is shocking, but I actually have evidence that some of them will even lie to
you to keep from saying no.

The “1902” Close Revisited
As we look at imagination in selling and some of the closes in this
section, I’d like to go back to the “1902” Close, which I partially covered in
the first chapter.
Years ago, when I was selling cookware, I used this close tailored to fit
the cookware business and added a little imagination. I sold a heavy set of
stainless steel cookware with a core in the middle to transmit the heat more

evenly. This cookware was incredibly durable. As a matter of fact, to
demonstrate its durability, I persuaded one of the local police officers to
take his .45 caliber service revolver and, using a steel-jacketed slug, shoot
our small frying pan from a distance of twelve feet.
The impact from a .45 is enormous. I placed the frying pan against a tree
and the slug hit it dead center, but you had to look carefully to see where
that slug had hit the pan. Armed with this visual aid and a notarized letter
from the policeman, I had no trouble getting customers to listen to me talk
about durability. When I said to them, “This is a lifetime set of cookware,”
they understood and agreed that it would last a lifetime because the average
housewife doesn’t abuse her cookware to that degree.
As you might suspect, the cookware was expensive when compared to
the price of lighter cookware sold in stores. Many times the prospect would
raise the price objection, “It costs too much.” Zig: “How much too much
does it cost?” Prospect: “Oh, it’s two hundred dollars too much.” (To me
that was an astronomically ridiculous figure, but remember, we’ve got to
deal with the prospect’s feelings.) Again, as I will indicate on many
occasions throughout this book, you now use your talking pad.
When the prospect said, “Two hundred dollars too much,” I wrote down
the two hundred dollars on the talking pad so the prospect could see it, and
the dialogue went like this: Zig: “Mr. Prospect, how long do you think this
set of cookware will last you?” Prospect: “Oh, it will last forever.” Zig:
“Well, certainly it would last ten, fifteen, twenty, thirty years, wouldn’t it?”
Prospect: “No question about that!” Zig: “Well, why don’t we settle on a
minimal figure of ten years. This means that the cookware, in your mind,
will cost twenty dollars too much per year. Is that what you’re saying?”
Prospect: “Yes, that’s what I’m saying.”

Break Cost into Small Pieces
Zig: “Twenty dollars a year is how much each month?” Prospect: “Well,
that’s about a dollar and seventy-five cents a month.” Zig: “OK, that’s about
right. How often do you cook?” Prospect: “Two or three times a day.” Zig:
“Let’s be conservative and say twice a day, which means that in a month’s
time you would cook sixty meals [remember, I’m writing all these figures
on my talking pad]. So if this beautiful set of cookware costs a dollar and

seventy-five cents a month too much, that is less than three cents a meal too
much to have the finest set of cookware on the market.”

Ask Questions—Lead Them to a Decision
I continue: “Mr. and Mrs. Prospect, do you ever eat out?” Prospect:
“Why, sure!” Zig: “How often?” “Oh, once or twice a week.” Zig: “Do you
ever tip the waitress?” Prospect: “We always tip the waitress.” Zig: “How
much do you tip her?” Prospect: “Dollar, two dollars, it depends.”
(Remember, this was 1962!) I’d write “3¢” by “Your wife” and “$1.00” by
“Waitress.” Zig: “Let me offer a thought and ask a question. The waitress
takes the order, brings the food from the kitchen to the table, and brings the
extras like tea, coffee, and bread. Generally speaking, a busboy cleans the
table and carries the dishes back to the kitchen.
“Your wife goes to the store, buys the food, brings it home, puts it in the
cabinets and in the refrigerator. Later she takes the food out, cleans,
prepares, cooks, and serves it. Then after the meal she takes the leftovers,
stores them in the refrigerator, and then cleans up. Now, Mr. Prospect, in all
fairness, if you tip the waitress a dollar [I’d circle the “$1.00” several times]
just for bringing the food from the kitchen to the table, don’t you really
think your wife deserves at least three cents [I’d circle “Your wife” and
“3¢” several times] for shopping, cooking, serving, storing, and cleaning?”

Imagination, emotion, and logic are all at work on this one. Chances are
excellent you noticed the large number of questions asked in this dialogue
(twelve). This is significant because it forced the prospect to put pressure on
himself. When this happens, your chances for action are substantially
increased. In this example, the procedure and the questions undoubtedly
helped the husband put the wife’s contributions in a more realistic and
favorable light. The questions also brought the price into perspective and
broke it down to such a low figure that it was affordable.
The “1902” simply means you break it down to a figure which is so low
the prospect can visualize ownership of the product because he now sees it
as affordable. Three cents per use certainly put the cookware within reach,
especially since we had demonstrated it would save more than that with
each use. This close makes it easy for the prospect to buy, and that’s the role
of the professional salesperson.

Concentrate—Establish Credibility
This next close I’m going to share with you is a dramatic one. It’s one
you can effectively utilize almost regardless of what you sell. However, I
want to emphasize that every close and every procedure which I describe is
not going to fit everybody and that in most cases you will have to adapt
what I say to your specific situation. That’s the reason you need the notepad
mentioned on page 13 to go with this book. One more time, this book is not
a workbook, but it is a working book written to teach you how to sell more
effectively and to inspire you to translate the new “how to” into the oldfashioned DO IT NOW approach to sales success.
Many years ago I was working in the little community of St. Matthews,
South Carolina. I have always believed in “cluster” selling, so I habitually
went into a community and concentrated on a small area and quickly
became known to the local people. Not only did this save a lot of travel and
time, but it also helped me to establish credibility.
In St. Matthews, as in many other communities, after I’d been there a few
times I became known as the “Pot Man.” (I didn’t particularly like the title,
but in those days at least everyone knew they were talking about cookware
and not dope.) When I’d drive down the street or highway, somebody

would say, “There goes the Pot Man,” and somebody else would say,
“Yeah, I’m going to his party [cookware demonstration] next week!”

The “Tightwad” Close
After one demonstration with seven couples as prospects, I was making
the call-backs the next day. I sold the first five, and when I knocked on the
door at the home of the sixth couple, I heard a booming voice which you
could have heard all over town, “COME ON IN, MR. ZIGLAR!” I walked
in and there stood this giant! (If he had been green, he would have been the
“Jolly Green Giant.”) He was about six feet, seven inches tall and weighed
close to three hundred pounds. A jovial kind of a guy who blurted out, “It’s
good to see you! Me and you both know I ain’t agonna buy no fourhundred-dollar set of pots, but come on in, sit down, and we’ll talk
anyhow!”
For the record (and I think it was one!), that dude had eaten enough food
the night before to feed five normal-sized people. I had bought, cooked, and
personally served every bite he ate. Now he started the sales call by saying,
“We both know I’m not going to buy anything!”
That’s not exactly my idea of an ideal way to open an interview, but I
grinned, looked at him, and said, “Well, Mr. Prospect, you might know
you’re not going to buy anything, but I don’t.” Prospect: “Well, I might as
well tell you right now, I’ll be glad to talk to you, but I’m not going to buy a
thing.” Zig: “You know, it looks like you and I have a lot in common.”
Prospect: “Oh, how’s that?” Zig: “In my case, my wife spends my money
and my neighbors take care of my business, so that leaves me free to work!
Now I don’t know if your wife spends your money, but I can tell you your
neighbors take care of your business!” Prospect: “Why do you say that?”
Zig: “Well, today, every time I called on one of your neighbors, after I had
talked with them, and incidentally, all of them did buy [I wanted to get that
little word in at that point], each one would ask, ‘Have you called on Mr.
So-and-So yet?’ I’d say, ‘No, not yet. I see him later this afternoon.’
Without exception, each one said, ‘Well, let me know what he does!’ ”

Your Neighbors Don’t Know You

“I finally asked one of them, ‘Why does everyone want to know what Mr.
So-and-So’s going to do?’ One of them grinned and said, ‘Well, he’s known
around the community as being fairly conservative.’ ” The old boy just
hollered, and said, “They probably said that I’m the biggest tightwad in the
county!” Zig: “Well, one of them did say something about ‘first dollar,’ but
I never quite understood what he meant!” The prospect half snorted and
said, “You know perfectly good and well what he meant, and he might be
right. I am a little conservative.”
Zig: “Well, they might think you’re conservative, but I think it’s rather
interesting that you were born and raised in this community and yet your
friends and neighbors don’t know the first thing about you!” Prospect:
“What’re you talking about?” Zig: “Well, I thought you said you were not
going to buy a set of my cookware.” Prospect: “I’m not!” Zig: “Isn’t that
interesting? You were born and raised around these people all your life, and
they don’t know the first thing about you!” Prospect: “What are you talking
about?” Zig: “Mr. Prospect, if I remember correctly—and I believe I do—
you told me last night you’ve been married something like twenty-three
years.” Prospect: “Yeah, as a matter of fact, this August will be twenty-four
years.” Zig: “OK, let me ask you a question. Were you sincere last night
[don’t ever ask a person if he was telling the truth; that’s an insult] when
you said you felt you could save at least a dollar a day by cooking in our set
of cookware?” Prospect: “With this crowd I’ve got, I could save maybe two
dollars per day. You saw how much I ate last night, and I’ve got four boys
who eat just as much!”

Tie It Down
Zig: “Well, certainly you could save at least a dollar, couldn’t you?”
Prospect: “At least.” Zig: “Well, if it will save you a dollar a day to have the
set of cookware, that means it costs you a dollar a day not to have the
cookware, doesn’t it?” Prospect: “I suppose you could say that.” (Note:
Here’s where you need to be firm and strong—but gentle. This is where a
good, healthy self-image is crucial. If you let him off the hook at this point,
he’s not going to buy at the end of the interview.) Zig: “What I say is not
important. Since it is your money, what do you say?” (In this type of
dialogue, voice inflection can be the determining factor.) Prospect: “I

suppose I could say the same thing.” Zig: “Actually, you can take the
‘suppose’ out, can’t you?” Prospect: “Yes.”
Zig: “Instead of saving a dollar a day, if I were to talk about saving fifty
cents a day, that would be ultra-ultraconservative, wouldn’t it?” Prospect:
“It sure would!” Zig: “OK, if this set of cookware will save you fifty cents a
day, that means every two days you don’t provide your wife with this
money-saving cookware, she reaches into your pocket, takes out a brandnew, crisp one-dollar bill, tears it up into a lot of little pieces, and throws it
away, doesn’t it?” (At this point, I slowly tore up a crisp, new one-dollar
bill and threw the pieces on the floor.)
Zig: “Mr. Prospect, you can stand the dollar loss, but according to your
neighbors, you don’t get excited about it. And according to your neighbors,
even though this beautiful home is yours, and not yours and the savingsand-loan’s, and even though the eleven hundred acres of land is yours, and
not yours and the bank’s [and I smiled], you don’t want to waste anything.
Now, Mr. Prospect, do you realize that on the basis of losing fifty cents a
day, every forty days you and your wife take a brand-new, twenty-dollar bill
and literally tear it all to pieces and throw it away?” (At this point, I slowly
tore up a twenty-dollar bill, but I did put the pieces in my pocket.)

Let Them See and Feel Your Message
Let me digress for just a moment. As you read about me tearing up that
money, did you feel a slight hitch in the pocketbook (you might imagine
yourself sitting there as the money was being mutilated)? I want to remind
you that my prospect was a notorious tightwad. When I was slowly tearing
up that money, I was eyeballing him and I can tell you that cold sweat broke
out on his forehead.

Questions Make Him Think
I looked at him and asked, “Mr. Prospect, what did you think when I tore
up that dollar bill?” Prospect: “I thought you’d lost your mind!” Zig: “What
did you think when I tore up the twenty-dollar bill?” Prospect: “Didn’t think
a thing—I knew you had!” Zig: “Mr. Prospect, whose money was that?”
Prospect: “I hope it was yours!” I assured him it was and continued, “Yet
you really felt physical pain when I tore up that money, didn’t you?”

Prospect: “I sure did!” Zig: “Mr. Prospect, can I ask you a question?”
Prospect: “Sure.” Zig: “Don’t you feel even closer to money that’s your
very own?”
Prospect: “What are you getting at?” Zig: “It’s really very simple.
[Again, I’d go back to my talking pad.] You told me you have been married
over twenty-three years. Now I don’t know how to multiply by twenty-three
real fast, so let’s cut it down to twenty [I wrote “20” on the pad]. You’ve
already told me that this set of cookware would save you fifty cents a day—
minimum—which means it costs you fifty cents a day not to have it. If we
put only three hundred sixty days in the year, that means it costs you one
hundred eighty dollars a year not to have this set of cookware [I wrote the
“$180”]. That means, Mr. Prospect [and I was multiplying this on my
talking pad], that in twenty years you have already paid three thousand six
hundred dollars [20 years x $180] not to have a set of our cookware, but
you won’t give three hundred ninety-five dollars [I wrote “$395”]—that’s
all it costs to have a set of the cookware—and you say you are
conservative! Mr. Prospect, that’s government thinking if I ever heard it!”

He’s Convinced—Now Persuade Him
My prospect got real quiet and reflective, so I smilingly continued,
“That’s bad enough, but even more amazing is that you are now saying,
‘Mr. Ziglar, in the next twenty years I am going to pay another three
thousand six hundred dollars not to have a set of the cookware [in large
figures I wrote “$3,600”], but I’m unwilling to invest three hundred ninetyfive dollars to have a set of the cookware.’ ”
As he thought about this I pressed my advantage by saying, “Mr.
Prospect, I don’t like to threaten anyone, but with that kind of thinking I
believe it’s only fair to warn you that I’m going to tell your neighbors all
about you [obviously, I’m smiling]. Up until now they have thought you
were conservative, but when they learn that you are perfectly willing to pay
seven thousand two hundred dollars [I added $3,600 + $3,600] in losses not
to have a set of our cookware but refuse to invest three hundred ninety-five
dollars to own a set, I fear your reputation as a conservative will be ruined
forever.”

It got awfully quiet for a few seconds; then he asked me a question which
I think is one of the most significant questions I’ve ever been asked. It
revealed a great deal about human nature and had an impact on my thinking
as a salesman. Question: “Mr. Ziglar, what would I tell my neighbors?”
Now please understand that of all the people in our country, the most
independent of the independent are the farmers. This particular farmer
certainly fit that role. Additionally, he was a “big man” in the community.
He was a wealthy and respected member of the school board, and yet he
was asking, “What would I tell my neighbors?”

Get Him Out of the Corner
Why was he asking it? Very simple. When he was invited to the
demonstration, he had told the hostess, “I’ll go, but I’m not about to buy
any four-hundred-dollar set of pots!” He was late for the demonstration, and
when he made his entrance one of his neighbors kidded him by saying,
“Well, I see you’ve come to buy yourself a set of pots.” To this he had
loudly (I heard him from back in the kitchen) proclaimed, “I’ve come to eat
the man’s food! I’m not about to buy any four-hundred-dollar set of pots!”
Everybody there heard him, so he had literally painted himself into a corner.
At this point, having seen the demonstration the night before and the
financial presentation today, he is sold on the cookware. He wants to buy
and he certainly has the money, but before he will buy I’ve got to get him
out of that corner so he doesn’t lose face with his neighbors. If I can do this,
the sale is mine.

Learn This Lesson and You’ll Sell More
Important lesson, my selling friend. Many times your prospect has
painted himself into a corner by promising his wife, brother, friends, or
another salesperson that he won’t take any further action until . . . When the
“good” prospect is not buying, we need to be sensitive to the possibility that
he might be in a corner wanting to get out. That’s a job the professional
salesman loves to take on because it means sales for him.
I looked at him, grinned, and said, “Mr. Prospect, it’s not only simple but
it will actually make your neighbors love and respect you even more. I’m
going to give you a receipt marked PAID IN FULL, because I know you’re

not about to pay any high-priced interest since you’re ‘conservative’ [we
both smiled]. I want you to take this receipt, go to each one of your
neighbors, and say, ‘Look what I’ve got!’ I might add that you should
prepare yourself for a horselaugh and a little good-natured ribbing. When
that happens, just smile and tell them, ‘Yeah, I know I said I wasn’t going to
buy a set of those high-priced pots, but when I said that, all I really knew
was the price. When I saw that the cookware saved money and food value,
as well as saving my wife a lot of work, it just made sense to buy it.
Frankly, I love my wife and family too much to let my own stubbornness
keep my family from getting something we would all enjoy.’
“Your neighbors will love you, Mr. Prospect, because it takes a big man
to admit he made a mistake—that he made a premature decision. Then it
takes an even bigger man to correct that mistake.” He got up, and as he
walked out of the living room to go to the bedroom to get his checkbook, he
said, “You’re the dadgonest fellow I have ever seen in my life!”
He became a good friend and one of my biggest boosters. From that
moment, when people in the community learned that “Mr. Conservative”
himself had bought, it made my sales even better and easier. I emphasize
that all I did was take him out of the corner into which he had painted
himself. That made the sale relatively easy.

The “Diagram” Close
Every product has a maximum price or ceiling. This price is all you can
pay. (This is not true of services which are ongoing.) This is not true of
benefits. If the product saves money by its use, the longer it is functioning
properly and in use, the greater your benefits will be.
If you sell a product which saves money, like the set of cookware I just
mentioned, I would diagram the example this way:

CLOSE: “If you buy the cookware, the savings will pay for it. If you
don’t buy it, your daily losses will soon be more than the cost of the
cookware. In other words, you can get it and let it pay for itself or you can
choose not to get it and still pay for it through losses. Since you’ve got to
pay for it whether you get it or not, doesn’t it make sense to go ahead and
get it?”
OR: “As you can see, just by saving 50¢ a day, at the end of 800 days the
cookware will have paid for itself. If you don’t get it, at the end of 800 days
you will have paid the $400 through losses and still not have the cookware.
So the choice is simple: Invest $400 and get the cookware, which will
return the $400, or don’t invest $400 but still pay $400 through losses and
still not have the cookware.” (Pause. Smile.)

The “20/20” Close
“You’re going to love your cookware, and we can deliver it on our 20/20
plan, which is $20 per month for 20 months with two $20 deposits in
advance. Or you could take advantage of our 90-day cash discount plan.
Which would suit your needs best?”
Note: Ben Feldman, possibly the greatest insurance salesman ever, says it
this way: “You make the sale when the prospect understands that it will cost
more to do nothing about the problem than to do something about it.”

And Another One

In 1977 we invested nearly $10,000 in a new copying machine. By our
calculations that machine saves us at least two hours each day. At just $5
per hour (1977 costs), that’s $10 per day, $50 a week, or $2,500 per year.
Not only does this machine do better work, but we have fewer fouled-up
copies, so we save money on paper. Because we invested in the machine we
saved enough by using it for the machine to pay for itself. Had we not
bought the machine we would have paid for it in actual losses and would
not be able to show anything for the $10,000.
The point is clear. If you sell goods or services which save money, you
should work on your presentation until it is crystal clear to your prospects
that they pay for your product whether they get it or not. Since they pay for
it whether they get it or not, they might as well go ahead and get it. One
more time: Don’t just tell them—show the figures at the same time.
Prospects make the decision to buy based on what they understand and
believe.
One more time: When the prospect clearly understands that it costs more
not to invest in a money-saving device than it does to invest in the device,
he will invest—if you ask him to and help him figure out a simple way to
make the financial arrangements.

Not Available in Any Bookstore
Questions for you! As a reader, if there were a single cassette recording
or CD that taught you how to train and use your voice, how to ask
questions, how to tell stories, how to use your imagination, how to paint
vivid word pictures, and how to make more sales, you would be interested
in knowing about it, wouldn’t you? (If you said no, please go back to page
27 and change your answer as to why you bought this book.)
If this recording was sixty minutes in length and was done in front of a
live audience by yours truly so you would know I was sharing with you
instead of talking to you, that would be even more exciting, wouldn’t it?
If I personally guaranteed the recording would motivate you to want to
be more professional and specifically teach you how to be more
professional and sell more, you’d really like that, wouldn’t you? (Say yes.)
If you could acquire this tape for just three dollars, to cover production,
shipping, and handling costs, that would be more than fair, wouldn’t it?6

The “Action Now” Close

If you take action on this offer, you’ll have to agree that at least one of
the techniques in this book works, doesn’t it? If you haven’t taken action on
the offer, let me ask you a question. Are you having trouble with too many
prospects who want to “think about it,” “sleep on it,” “talk to my mate,
lawyer, banker, C.P.A.,” “check around,” etc.? In other words—they
procrastinate. You do know that procrastinators bring out the
procrastination syndrome in others, don’t you?
With this in mind, is it clear to you that the best way to get action from
others is to take action yourself? Your next step is clear, isn’t it? If you are
one of the procrastinators who has decided to become an ex-procrastinator,
read the footnote and take action now so you can go forward more rapidly
in your career.
Now you are probably wondering why I would make such an effort to
sell you a three-dollar cassette. The reason is twofold. First, I wanted to
demonstrate another “question-asking” procedure to lead prospects to a
decision. Second, and far more importantly, I’m completely convinced this
recording, teaching how to train and use your voice, when used in
conjunction with Secrets, will be the most effective single cassette
recording on sales training you will ever own. I want you to own it. NOW
HEAR THIS: If you feel anything less than 100 percent good about my
“selling” you so strongly and taking more than a page of your book to do
so, here is what I’m willing—even anxious—to do: If you will give us a call
and tell us that you want a copy of the recording for free, we will send you
the tape free. This recording is important for your career. I want you to have
it.
Important: This recording is available only through our company at the
address and phone number in the footnote. (Limit one recording per
customer, whether for free or three dollars.)

The “No Procedure” Close
Sometimes the best procedure is no procedure. Example: Recently after
an exciting day on the golf course with the president and executive vice
president of our company, along with a business associate, we were headed
back home. We cut through the Dallas–Fort Worth Airport and took the
access road. As I topped a hill, there sat a friendly policeman waving me to

the side. I use the word friendly a little facetiously, because at that point he
had a pretty grim look on his face.
I was honestly surprised because I did not believe I had been speeding.
The officer asked if he could see my driver’s license. I reached for it, and as
I did, I pleasantly asked him why he had stopped me. He said, “You were
doing fifty-one, which is sixteen miles above the speed limit.” I replied, in a
little shock, “Gracious, I had no idea the speed limit was thirty-five—I
thought it was fifty-five.” He assured me it was thirty-five. I said, “Then in
that case, I am guilty as charged, because I definitely was speeding.”
He asked me where I was going. I told him I was going home but that I
was in no hurry and therefore it just didn’t make any sense for me to be
speeding. He smiled and said, “Well, let me get you to slow it down, if you
will.” As he handed me back my driver’s license, I assured him that I
would.
I’m convinced that in this situation, had I attempted to give a “sales talk,”
I would have ended up with a ticket. I emphasize that what I said was
effective entirely because I was genuinely shocked to learn the speed limit
was thirty-five. I’m certain there were signs on the access road saying “35,”
but I had not noticed them despite the fact I’d been on that road a halfdozen times.
This reminds me of the axiom When you’ve laid an egg, step back and
admire it as you acknowledge what you have done. That’s exactly what I
did. I acknowledged without hesitation I’d been speeding. In my own mind
I’m convinced he made the final decision not to give me the ticket when I
said I was in no hurry, because I really wasn’t. My story wasn’t fancy or
imaginative, but it was effective because it was true.
In the world of selling, as I have indicated many times throughout Secrets
of Closing the Sale, the completely honest approach is the best approach.

21
Imagination Sells and Closes Sales
Thus far we have covered a number of specific closing techniques which I
believe will increase your closing effectiveness. Now we’re going to look at
a significant close with a number of sales lessons built into the close. I tell
this one in story form because the story is easy to remember and when you
remember the story you will remember the close and the lessons. Again, I
will be demonstrating the importance of effectively using your voice and
applying your imagination to your sales situations.
I will also share with you the importance of ignoring certain objections
and not taking it too seriously when some prospects say they’re just “not
interested.”

We’ll Have to Buy from Someone Else
Years ago when I was in the insurance business, one of the things that
frustrated me most was this: After conducting the fact-finding interview, I
would go back for the presentation, tell the story, and sell the product, the
need, and our service, only to have the prospect look at me and say, “Mr.
Ziglar, you know I’m embarrassed we’ve permitted you to come back.
Although we recognize our need for insurance, if we buy any, we can’t buy
from you. My wife’s second cousin’s next-door neighbor’s best friend’s
uncle’s son’s classmate has a friend whose daughter’s husband is in the
insurance business [maybe it wasn’t quite that bad, but it was pretty
farfetched!], and if we buy any insurance, we’ll have to buy from him.”

The “Marriage” Close

Obviously, it was a stall, and it bugged me that I had sold a need and
nobody, including the prospect and yours truly, was going to benefit from it.
One day while thinking about the problem, I came up with a solution and
developed the “Marriage” Close. This close came from an idea I got from
Frank Bettger’s book How I Raised Myself from Failure to Success in
Selling. I read the book in 1948, but it was not until eight years later that I
utilized this bit of Frank’s information and added a little imagination to
develop this close.
I designed a “Marriage Certificate” and had it printed on beautiful
parchment paper. When the prospect stalled and said, “I like the idea but I’ll
have to buy from _____________,” I looked him in the eye and replied,
“I’m confident the individual you mention is competent and the company
he represents is legitimate, since it is licensed in this state. [Never make a
negative or antagonistic comment.] But, Mr. Prospect, I can do something
for you at this moment that no other insurance man in America can do.”
Obviously, that’s going to elicit the question “What’s that?” At that point I
would reach into my briefcase, pull out the Marriage Certificate, and say, “I
can marry you.” [The reaction was interesting.]
“Let me explain this to you.” Across the top the certificate said,
“CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE.” Then, “This Certificate of Marriage,
issued this 18th day of January 2003 [or ’04 or ’05 or whenever], is
between Zig Ziglar and John and Mary Smith. By this marriage Zig Ziglar
agrees to be available in time of need for John and Mary Smith. [I had
typed their names in before I made the call.] Zig agrees to stay abreast of
the trends in tax and Social Security developments so he can properly
advise John and Mary Smith as to their insurance needs. He agrees to be
available for consultation and help. John and Mary Smith agree to give Zig
Ziglar the privilege of earning the right to serve. Cancellable for any reason
by John and Mary Smith. Noncancellable for any reason by Zig Ziglar.”

Is This Legal, Mr. Ziglar?
The close: I would look at them and say, “All that’s required to put this
marriage into force is for you to put your OK right here.” Almost without
exception the man would look at his wife, grin, and say, “Honey, what
about that? This fellow wants to marry both of us at the same time! Do we

want to marry him?” Sometimes she’d laugh and say, “Well, I don’t know.
It’s up to you.” Often one of them would say, “Well, he looks like a pretty
nice fellow. Why don’t we go ahead?” Many times the husband would say,
“Mr. Ziglar, now this is legal, isn’t it? I mean, it’s not bigamy. You’re not
going to get us in trouble?”
I’d laugh and reply, “No, I’ve already talked to the governor, the
secretary of state, the insurance commissioner, and even cleared it with my
brother-in-law. Everybody says it’s perfectly all right.” Many times the man
would chuckle and say, “Well, why not?” He’d grab his pen and with a real
flowery twist he would really sign it. But a funny thing happened on the
way to the bank. Never once did I get the Marriage Certificate signed that I
did not also get the application blank signed.
By using the Marriage Certificate I’m doing two things. Number one, I’m
using a trial close. When they bought the first idea (signing the Marriage
Certificate) it made the second one a great deal easier to buy. Number two,
I’m saying to the prospect, “I’m not selling you just for today. I’m selling
you for the future. I’m going to be part of your life. I’m going to be your
insurance man.” That’s career-building selling.

Now Adapt It
I’m confident you’ve asked yourself this question many times, because
I’ve stressed it from the beginning of the book: “How do I adapt it to fit my
situation?” One of the most excited salesmen I’ve talked with is Jerry
Parker. Jerry formerly represented The Extracorporeal Corporation, which
is now a division of Johnson & Johnson. Incidentally, the word
extracorporeal means “outside the body.”

For over a year Jerry had been calling on the Los Robles Hospital in
Thousand Oaks, California. He was dealing with head nurse Loretta Davis
and was attempting to sell his products and services. For a year Mrs. Davis
kept telling him he had the highest price and his company gave the poorest
service.
To help you understand the importance of the call, his product is bloodlines. That’s the line that transfers the blood from the body to the artificial
kidney and then returns it to the body. A person on the system has to go
through this procedure thirteen times each month, which meant that 156
lines were involved for every patient for a year’s usage. Multiply this by
forty patients, and as you can see, you’re talking about 6,240 lines. This
represented a substantial order.
During this year Jerry was doing two things. He was building a
relationship of trust and friendship with Mrs. Davis. He was also listening
every day to our cassette recordings on selling. He heard the “Marriage”
Close not just once but many different times. Finally, one day, half in jest,
Mrs. Davis asked Jerry, “Why in the world should I buy from you, since
your price is the highest and your service is the poorest?”
Jerry quickly searched his mind, came up with an adaptation of the
“Marriage” Close, looked at her, and smiled as he said, “Because I can
marry you.” With that Mrs. Davis laughed uproariously and said, “Well,
what in the world would Willie say about that?” Jerry quickly responded,
“Don’t misunderstand. Here’s what I mean. [As he made the statement he
saw a brown paper bag lying on the counter. He reached over, picked it up,

and quickly wrote “Certificate of Marriage” across the top. Jerry then
explained, as he wrote, the essence of the “marriage” agreement.]
“When you buy our service you also buy me, and I am literally going to
be married to this account. I’m going to see to it that you get the best
possible service. I will be your personal representative between your
hospital and our company. I will see to it that things are handled in an
effective and efficient manner so your patients will always be taken care of.
The few pennies in extra cost will be far more than compensated with the
assurance that not only are you getting the best product on the market but
you’re also getting my personal interest and attention. This is critical to the
hospital because it directly involves the well-being of your patients. That is
your first consideration, isn’t it, Mrs. Davis?” (She acknowledged that it
was.)
By this time Jerry had completed his writing, so he handed the
“Certificate of Marriage” to Mrs. Davis and said, “The only thing necessary
to put this marriage agreement in force is for you to put your OK right
here.” Mrs. Davis thought about it for a moment and recognized that it
made sense. In addition, because of his pleasant and persistent belief that
his product was the best, she had developed confidence in Jerry and knew
the validity of his argument. He had followed the right procedure, he had
used the right words, his interest was in the well-being of the hospital and
its patients. Mrs. Davis trusted him. She signed the “marriage agreement”
and a few minutes later signed the official order form.
As Jerry was sharing this story with me, I can tell you he was enthusiastic
and excited about it. Yes, these procedures work—if you will do as Jerry
Parker did and adapt them to your specific situation.

The “Imagination” Close
One of the most amazing examples of the use of imagination is that of
Paul Jeffers of Sacramento, California. In 1982 Paul made eighty-six
speeches and sold $9.8 million worth of life insurance involving seventy
sales and over $250,000 in premiums. Paul is a remarkable man who
believes that failure to hit the bull’s-eye is never the fault of the target, and
failure to buy is never the fault of the prospect.

On February 8, 1975, Paul Jeffers lost his sense of hearing, but he
laughingly said that being deaf gave him an advantage over other
salespeople because he never heard anybody say no.
Not long after Paul suddenly lost his hearing, and before he completely
mastered the art of reading lips, he was by himself on a significant
interview with two prospects. In Paul’s words, here is what happened: “I
walked into their office, started talking to them, and they answered, and by
golly, I couldn’t read their lips. So I said, ‘Gentlemen, I can’t read your
lips.’ I pulled out my yellow scratch pad and said, ‘I’m going to give each
one of you a scratch pad and you write out your questions and I’ll answer
the questions you’ve written. Is that fair enough?’ They both nodded their
heads yes, so I handed them the scratch pads and they wrote all kinds of
questions on that crazy sheet of paper! They handed them back to me, I
looked at the pad—and I couldn’t read their handwriting—either one of
’em!
“So I said, ‘Gentlemen, I really have a problem. I can’t read your lips and
can’t read your handwriting. So I’ve got two choices—I can walk out of
here right now and forget about it, or better yet, why don’t you let me give
you the presentation the way I normally would because I have all this
material prepared? Let me give you the objections I think you would give
me and I will give you the answers to those objections. All you have to do
is shake your head up and down if you agree with me and from side to side
if you disagree. Is that fair enough?’ They both nodded yes to the
suggestion.
“I’m charging through that presentation, boy, best one I’ve ever made! I
go through the story, the objections, the answers to the objections, the
whole thing, get down to the close, and I say, ‘Gentlemen, is there anything
about this plan you do not like? Is there any reason you can think of that
you don’t want to get started right now? Is there any problem in giving me a
check for $3,800 immediately?’ They shook their heads no, so I said, ‘Make
the check out to Standard Insurance Company.’ They did, and handed me
the check.
“Now most insurance people can get an application without a check— I
get a check without an application! Now what do I do? How do I handle
this? Where is my manager to help me? Obviously, he wasn’t there. I was

strictly on my own, so I said, ‘Look, I’m going to give you a blank Part One
of the application. Please print in block letters, very plainly. I’m also going
to give you another blank Part One for you to sign. I’ll transfer the
information from the one you’ve printed over to the one you’ve signed; it’ll
be in my handwriting. We’ll get you examined by a doctor, and we’re both
covered, is that fair enough?’ They both nodded their heads yes.” Paul
laughingly says, “That’s what I call a controlled interview, and I’ll bet you a
buck you’ve never had one like that any time!”
For years I’ve heard that you could parachute a professional salesman
into a strange area where he knew absolutely no one and by nightfall he
would be in business. I agree with that observation, especially if that
salesman has the imagination, tenacity, will to win, and love for people
which Paul Jeffers has.
Another man with imagination and all the other attributes of an
outstanding salesman is E. U. Parker, Jr., of Laurel, Mississippi. According
to Bill Sanders, who was regional vice-president of State Farm Insurance
companies when this book was originally released, E. U. had been totally
blind since age eight. Despite this fact, he became the first C.L.U. in the
mid-south region. In Bill Sanders’ words, “In the automobile insurance
business, it is very important that an agent see and record prior damage to
the automobile at the time it is insured. Our blind agent continues to ‘see’
and record more prior damage than any of our other agents.”
The stories of Paul Jeffers and E. U. Parker, Jr., simply emphasize that
“handicaps” are handicaps only when you “see” or “hear” them as
handicaps. Chalk up the stories of these two men as another reason I’m so
excited about the sales profession.

The “Click” Close
People buy for some incredible reasons. A number of years ago when I
was in Nashville, my brother, Judge Ziglar, and I were the home-office
general agents for a life insurance company. We had joined the company
early and helped raise capital through the sale of stock. There was a threemonth delay after the stock issue was closed and the company was in full
operation. All we had was a rate book, and in the competitive world of life

insurance programming, if you are going to compete, you need to be able to
make a full presentation with a complete proposal.
Since we could not afford a three-month income sabbatical, we decided
to buy the equipment to print and figure the proposals. One of the things we
needed was a calculator. In those days only three companies, Friden,
Monroe, and Marchant, manufactured automatic calculators (they were not
computers).
We eliminated the Marchant because of the ineptness of the salesperson,
but we still had to decide between a Friden and a Monroe. We decided on
the Friden for the weirdest of all reasons. Everything else was equal, but
would you believe we liked the way the Friden “clicked” better? In 1961
that calculator cost a thousand dollars. Despite this, the deciding factor was
that we liked the “click” of the Friden calculator the best.

Point: People don’t buy for logical reasons. They buy for emotional
reasons.
That’s why you need to be sensitive to some of the “little” things about your
prospect and his needs if you expect to improve your closing percentages.

The “Special Occasion” Close
I spent eighteen years in the world of direct selling. During this time I
developed a number of “Special Occasion” closes. Many times vacuum
cleaner, alarm system, water softener, and cookware salespeople as well as
others will encounter the following or a similar situation. This close, as it is,
was originally designed for the direct sales world, but when you see how
effectively a young furniture store owner used his imagination and adapted
it for his business, you will know why I included it in this segment on
imagination.
In the cookware business I demonstrated at night for a group of husbands
and wives and made appointments to see them together the next day.
However, on many occasions only the wife would be at home for the
appointment. Generally the wife would assure me she could make the
decision, but when I finished the presentation she sometimes attempted to

terminate the interview by saying that on second thought, she was going to
have to talk to her husband because she now had the information he needed
to make the decision. That meant in most cases I was not going to get the
sale. Don’t misunderstand. If she really did have to talk to her husband, I
wanted her to do so. I knew from painful experience if she bought over his
objections I’d end up with a cancellation or, even worse, a dissatisfied
customer.
However, I needed to find out if it were a put-off or a legitimate reason
for not buying, so I would say, “That’s fine. Since he gets home at six [I
learned his hours the night before], I’ll drop back at seven, or would eight
be better?” With this approach I quickly found out if she was really
interested or if she was just trying to get rid of me. If she gave me the old
routine, “Well, you know, we’ve been married for over twenty years and I
know how to handle him,” I knew it was a lost cause.
As a salesperson you already know there is a vast difference between
understanding something well enough to buy it as opposed to
understanding it well enough to sell it. She understood the value of the
cookware well enough to buy it, but there was no way she could understand
it well enough to “sell” it to her husband. I had spent years learning how to
explain it well enough to sell it and she had seen one demonstration.
When the housewife stalled on giving me the appointment, I responded
with, “Let me ask you a question. What time does your husband get home
with the groceries?” Housewife: “What do you mean?” Zig: “I assume he
does buy the groceries.” Housewife: “No, he sure doesn’t!” Zig: “Well, who
does?” Housewife: “I buy the groceries!” Zig: “Have you always bought
them?” Housewife: “Why, certainly.” Zig: “Boy, groceries are expensive,
aren’t they?” Housewife: “They sure are!” Zig: “I’ll bet you they cost you
twenty, twenty-five dollars a week, don’t they?” Invariably she’d say,
“What do you mean, twenty or twenty-five? You mean a hundred and
twenty or twenty-five!” Zig: “You mean they cost more than twenty or
twenty-five dollars?” Housewife: “You’ve never bought groceries!” Zig:
“Let me ask you, would fifty dollars a week be a conservative estimate of
what you spend on groceries?” Housewife: “It sure would.”

After All, Mrs. Prospect, You Picked Him

Zig: “Mrs. Prospect, that being the case [and again, back to our talking
pad], you invest fifty dollars a week for groceries [write it down]. Let’s take
that fifty-dollar figure times just fifty weeks in a year. That means in a
year’s time you spend twenty-five hundred dollars for groceries. Now, Mrs.
Prospect, according to what you tell me, you’ve been married twenty years.
Twenty years times twenty-five hundred dollars per year is fifty thousand
dollars your husband has already trusted you to spend for groceries. I’m not
being unkind, Mrs. Prospect, but I’ll bet you can’t show me more than a
hundred dollars’ worth of groceries right now for the whole fifty thousand,
can you?”
We would both laugh and she’d say, “Why, of course not!” Then I’d say,
“Mrs. Prospect, he has already trusted you to invest fifty thousand dollars
for food. Don’t you honestly think he will trust you to invest just four
hundred more to cook the next fifty thousand dollars’ worth of food in the
best and most economical manner?”

Here’s Why He Married You
If that one didn’t get the order, I would add this: “One of the reasons he
tells folks he married you is that he admires your judgment, Mrs. Prospect,
for selecting him.” I’d get really quiet, smile, look her in the eye, and say,
“Now you know if he trusted you to pick out your own husband, he’s going
to trust you to invest a few dollars in a set of cookware to cook his food.” I
sold lots of cookware on that particular one!
Don’t misunderstand. I personally do not believe any salesperson can sell
everybody he talks with. However, I do believe with a little imagination,
most of us can increase our closing percentages considerably. I also know
the most frustrating experience a salesperson has is to miss a sale he knows
he should have made. Not only does this affect his own income for the
moment, but more importantly it makes it impossible for him to render any
service to that person. I simply want to give that prospect every opportunity
to make a favorable decision.
In conjunction with this, many times I’m asked the question, “Just how
long should you stay with a prospect?” There’s no set rule or specific
answer to that one. It’s something you have to “feel” and something you
learn from experience. My own barometer was that I stayed as long as the

prospect displayed obvious interest or until he emphatically said he was not
going to buy.

It Works in Retail Stores, Too
As I was preparing the original manuscript of this book, Randy Cooper,
an excited young furniture store owner (who doesn’t believe in recessions!)
dropped by my office to see me. Unfortunately, I’ve lost track of Randy, but
at that time Randy owned Cooper’s Home Furnishings in Enid, Oklahoma,
and was tremendously excited about his business and how he adapted this
close to make “one of the easiest sales I’ve ever made.”
In December of 1982, a lady and her daughter came into his store to look
for a recliner which her husband was going to buy for her Christmas
present. She found exactly what she wanted, and the investment was $449.
She told Randy she would talk to her husband about it. Fortunately, when
the lady walked in Randy had been listening to this “Special Occasion”
Close. Here’s how he adapted it.
Randy: “Mrs. Prospect, I’m a single parent and keep my two children
three days each week. I buy my groceries myself and they cost me about a
hundred dollars a week.” Prospect: “I buy my groceries, too, and that’s
about what mine cost.” Randy: “A hundred dollars a week is over five
thousand dollars a year [strong voice emphasis], and I’ll bet you don’t even
talk it over with your husband, do you?” At this point, Randy said, the lady
stuck her chin out, looked right at her daughter, and said, “I’ll take it!”
Incidentally, Randy started his business without any sales training, and in
our brief encounter he expressed delight and a little surprise that these
things actually work. A real shocker came on an adaptation of the
“Alternate of Choice” Close tied to the “Assumptive” Close. A man and his
wife had selected a number of items which came to a substantial dollar
amount. The wife told Randy they would go home and “think about it.”
Randy suddenly became “hard of hearing,” looked at the husband, and
asked, “Do you want to take this home yourself or do you want us to deliver
it?” Husband to wife: “What do we want to do?” Wife: “Shoot, they charge
for delivering. We’ll take it ourselves.” (Remember, this is the same lady
who just twenty seconds earlier was going to go home and “think about it.”)

One more time: I’m convinced that many sales are lost or missed simply
because the salesperson doesn’t ask the prospect to buy.

The “Tuit” Close
Many times in the world of selling there are people whom you can nudge
over the line, or should I say “on” the line, with a little humor. Never will I
forget a company I called on to sell an $18,000 sales training package.
Management was sold on the program and had decided to buy, but they
were procrastinating. They kicked it back and forth and back and forth, but
always ended up saying, “We will let you know.” Zig: “Do you have any
time frame?” Company: “Probably within the next thirty, sixty, ninety
days.” Zig: “But you seem to be sold and you really want it.” Company:
“Yes, we do!” Zig: “You definitely are eventually going to go ahead and do
this, aren’t you?” Company: “We sure are.” Zig: “In other words, just as
soon as you get around to it, then you’re going to go ahead and start this
training program?” Company: “We sure are.”

With that I looked at them, smiled, and said, “Well, gentlemen [there
were four of them involved], let me say this. I’ve thoroughly enjoyed
dealing with you because I can see you are sincere. When you tell me
you’re going to start this training program as soon as you get around to it, I
know you are serious, so let me give you my card.
“My card, as you can plainly see, is round and has my name, address, and
phone number on one side. On the other side it has the word TUIT. Now
that spells ‘tuit.’ It is round and it’s a ‘tuit,’ so it is a ‘round tuit.’ Since you
said you were going to start our training program just as soon as you ‘got
around to it,’ let me be the first to congratulate you, because you’ve now
got your ‘round tuit,’ so we can get your training program started
immediately.”

Are You Kidding Me?

Now you might be thinking to yourself, “C’mon, Ziglar, you’ve got to be
kidding! You mean those guys went ahead and bought because you put that
one on ’em?” I mean to tell you exactly that, but don’t misunderstand. I
didn’t walk in and say, “As soon as you fellows get around to it, you’re
probably going to start a good training program, aren’t you?” That’s crazy. I
had done my homework. I’d laid the groundwork; I’d established the need
and the fact that our program met their needs. In addition, the work I had
done with them previously had enabled us to establish rapport and trust. All
the TUIT did was jump-start them and get them into immediate action.

“Maybe” Will Kill You in Selling
Action now really is the objective of the sales call. I’ve said it before and
I’ll say it a dozen times. The prospects who say yes will not run you out of
the sales business. The prospects who say no won’t put you out of business.
But those prospects who say maybe will not only put you out of business,
they’ll run you out of your mind, especially if you are in direct sales.
Here’s why. If you take each person seriously who says he will “buy
later,” you will build a backlog of false security which you plan to “cash” at
an opportune time. Obviously, if you are in an industry in which callbacks
are a way of life (like detailing doctors on new drugs, offering a new line to
a department store which has carried a competitive line for “umpteen”
years, etc.), and you promise to see them on your next trip, you keep that
commitment.
The “Tuit” Close, like most closes, fits a specific need at a specific time.
It is true there are occasions when you can kid a prospect into doing
something you could not seriously talk him into doing. Again, you need to
study your prospect and your situation, throw in a little common sense, and
as our Australian friends would say, “give it a go.”
P.S. If you would like to try it, send me a stamped, self-addressed
envelope and I’ll send you a free round TUIT.

The “Challenge” Close
Sales trainer and management development expert Larry Wilson, before
he launched his career in the world of sales and management development,
was one of the top life insurance men in the country. He developed and used

what I call the “Challenge” Close. On his sales calls, Larry took a marble, a
baseball, and a beach ball with him. When he started to close the sale, if the
prospect gave him a lot of resistance— especially from a financial point of
view—Larry would take the marble and ask the prospect to put it in his
pocket. Then Larry would say, “Mr. Prospect, the marble is so small and
light you are unaware it’s there. In a few days you will forget it altogether.”
Next, Larry took out his baseball and said, “Mr. Prospect, you could
struggle and get this baseball into your pocket. You could carry it wherever
you go, but every step you take and every move you make you will know it
is there.” Next, Larry took the beach ball out of his briefcase, inflated it,
and said, “Now there’s no way you can carry this in your pocket.
“That’s the way it is with life insurance. At your age, if you start today,
the premiums will be like carrying this marble. They are so small you soon
will forget you carry them. If you wait a few years, it will be like carrying
the baseball. You can do it, but you will always know they are there. If you
wait too long, it will be like carrying this beach ball. You just couldn’t do it.
So, Mr. Prospect, you really are not making a decision today to buy or not
to buy life insurance. You’re deciding, ‘Do I carry the marble? Do I carry
the baseball? Or do I carry the beach ball?’ I challenge you, Mr. Prospect,
carry the marble! It will be easier for you and better for your family.”
Many times the response came back, “Well, gee, I had never thought
about it quite that way.” To that, Larry would say, “By the way, the price of
marbles today is just __________, and you can handle it on a yearly,
quarterly, or monthly basis. Which would be more convenient for you?”
Needless to say, Larry sold a lot of insurance.

The “Twenty-Nine-Day” Close
When I was in the life insurance business, one of the things that
frequently bugged me was the fact that on occasion I could not uncover the
prospect’s real objection. I felt confident, in most cases, that I could
effectively deal with the spoken objection, but the unspoken one is far more
difficult to handle. As a matter of fact, on occasion it borders on the
impossible.
Never will I forget one evening when I was calling on a prospect who
had a need for more comprehensive life insurance coverage. He was in a

financial position to take care of that need and was deeply committed to the
well-being of his family. However, I was making zero progress with him as
he brought up stalls and objections with little or no validity. It became
increasingly obvious that I was not going to make the sale unless I did
something imaginative to “smoke out” the real objection.
With this in mind, I searched my memory bank and came up with the
germ of an idea which had been planted by a speaker (his identity escapes
me) at a seminar several years earlier. I took that idea, altered it
considerably, looked at my prospect, and said, “Mr. Prospect, I don’t know
why you’re hesitating to make this decision. You have already indicated
your need; you apparently are financially in a position to provide the
coverage; and your love for your family is obvious. The only thing which
enters my mind is the possibility that perhaps I’ve been offering you the
wrong product. Perhaps we should be talking about our ‘Twenty-Nine-Day
Agreement’ rather than the agreement which I have been discussing with
you.”

Out Comes the Talking Pad
At this point I turned to my talking pad and said, “Very briefly let me
explain the Twenty-Nine-Day Agreement. First of all, it carries the same
face amount of insurance which you’ve indicated you need. Second, the
retirement benefits are exactly the same, and that’s good because you’ve
emphasized the figure we have chosen is a minimal one. Third, the TwentyNine-Day Agreement provides both waiver of premium and double
indemnity in the event you become disabled and can’t make the payments
or are accidentally killed. Incidentally, since we mentioned premium, the
premium on this Twenty-Nine-Day Agreement is only 50 percent as much
as it is on the standard agreement. Would that suit your needs better?”
The prospect looked at me with some astonishment and said, “Well, it
certainly suits my pocketbook better, but what do you mean by a TwentyNine-Day Agreement?”
Frankly, it was all I could do to keep a straight face as I said, “What that
means, Mr. Prospect, is that you’re covered twenty-nine days out of every
month. Since this is April and there are only thirty days in the month, you
will be covered every day but one and the company will let you select that

day. It might be that you would prefer a Saturday or a Sunday.” Then I
stopped and said, “No, that would not be a good thing, because you will
probably be at home and, statistically speaking, home is the most dangerous
place for you to be.”
Then I looked at my prospect and apologetically said, “In all fairness, Mr.
Prospect, if you should elect to ask me to leave your home [or office] at this
point, you would be fully justified. I’ve been doing something which I
really have no right to do. I have apparently been making light of the future
well-being of your family, and you’re obviously the kind of man who takes
your family responsibilities very seriously.
“I strongly suspect that when I suggested this Twenty-Nine-Day
Agreement would leave you uninsured one or two days every month, the
thought entered your mind that you might well die or be killed on one of
those days.”
Breathe Easy, Mr. Prospect. “Let me put your mind at ease, Mr.
Prospect. There isn’t an insurance commissioner in the world who would
permit the sale of a Twenty-nine-Day Agreement. I took the liberty of
suggesting it, Mr. Prospect, because I knew you would be concerned about
even one day not being covered. Considering this, I knew you were not
about to leave your family’s future at the mercy of chance every day if you
could possibly avoid it. You do feel that way, don’t you, Mr. Prospect?
“I believe you’re the kind of man who will relate to the agreement you
and I have talked about from the beginning. That agreement, Mr. Prospect,
will cover you twenty-four hours out of every day, seven days out of every
week, regardless of where you are and what you’re doing. That’s the kind of
protection you want for your family, isn’t it, Mr. Prospect?”
Not only did I make the sale that night, but I used that close many times
during my career in the life insurance business. I did not make a sale every
time I used it, but there were many sales I did make because I took the germ
of an idea gathered at a long-ago sales meeting and tailored that idea to fit
my specific situation.
I cannot say this often enough or strongly enough: If you’re going to be
professional in selling, you must read, study, and listen to motivational and
educational recordings on a daily basis. You must attend clinics and

seminars conducted by the professionals. Then you must work at adapting
and applying these principles and ideas to fit your specific situation. That is
the way to stay inspired, informed, and up-to-date.

Imagination and Common Sense
It seems trite to say, but in the world of selling we need to find out the
prospect’s major interests and then show him how our product will meet his
needs and satisfy his interests.
During World War II, or so the story goes, G.I. insurance was introduced.
In simple terms it meant that for a minimal premium of six or seven dollars
a month, ten thousand dollars in life insurance was provided. If a
serviceman was killed, his beneficiaries received the ten thousand dollars. It
was a super deal, but like everything else, it had to be sold.
A young lieutenant called his infantry company to attention, explained
the policy in great detail, and passed out papers for those who were
interested in signing up for the insurance. Virtually no one bought. An old
sergeant asked the young lieutenant for permission to explain the program.
The lieutenant reluctantly agreed and felt confident that if he could not sell
the insurance, the sergeant couldn’t.

The “Front Line” Close
The sergeant stood up and in simple eloquence explained it this way:
“Men, as I understand it, here’s the program. You’re going to be sent
overseas. If you buy the insurance and get killed, the government is going
to send your family ten thousand big, beautiful dollars. If you don’t get the
insurance and you get killed, the government is not going to send your
family anything. My question is this: Who do you think the government is
going to send to the front lines first? The ones who would cost ten thousand
dollars if they’re killed, or the ones who would cost nothing if they’re
killed?” The men bought the insurance.
In reality I doubt that the story is true. However, as a practical matter, it
illustrates the point perfectly. Point: Regardless of what you sell, make it
crystal clear that your prospect is better off to buy than not to buy.

Sell Where You Are

In 1952 I was living in Florence, South Carolina, but selling and building
part of my sales organization in Wilmington, North Carolina. Late one
Saturday evening I was driving too fast on my way back to Florence. A
highway patrolman stopped me and proceeded to give me a ticket. Because
we had a mutual friend, he let me go without paying the bill that night on
the condition that I stop in Whiteville, North Carolina, on Monday and pay
the ticket on my way back to Wilmington.

The “Opportunity” Close
I vividly remember the amount of the ticket. It was thirty dollars. In 1952
that was a considerable sum of money. On Monday I stopped by the
courthouse to pay the fine. As I gave the money to the young woman who
was handling the tickets, the thought occurred to me that perhaps I could
recoup my loss by taking advantage of this opportunity. Since I had nothing
to lose, the following dialogue took place.
Zig: “I wonder if you’d mind if I ask you a couple of questions?” Single
girl (with a smile): “No.” Zig: “I just wonder, since you’re single and
working, if you are saving a portion of the money you’re earning?” Single
girl: “Yes, I am.” Zig: “If you should see something extremely nice, which
you definitely will need later on, would you be in a position to save an
additional twenty-five cents a day to get it, provided you really wanted it?”
Single girl: “Yes, I could.” Zig: “Well, if I had something in my car which
was really outstanding, truly beautiful, and something which you not only
will need but will use for the rest of your life, would you be courteous
enough to spend five minutes looking at it?” Single girl: “I’d be happy to.”
Zig: “Excuse me for a moment.”
I quickly stepped back out to my car and brought my cookware samples
into the office. I made a short but very enthusiastic demonstration and asked
the obligating question. After I asked the obligating question, she turned to
a married lady who was about ten years older and said, “What would you
do, if you were me?”
Before the other lady could answer, I interrupted and said, “Excuse me
for interrupting, but let me ask you a question. If you were in this girl’s
position, but knowing what you know about all of the expenses and
obligations you have as a married person with a growing family, if you had

had the same opportunity she has of acquiring this beautiful set of cookware
before you were married, in retrospect, what would you do?” Without a
moment’s hesitation the married lady said, “I would buy it.” With that I
turned to the single girl and said, “And that’s what you want to do, isn’t it?”
She smiled and said, “Yes,” so I wrote the order.

The “Companion” Close
When I finished writing the order, I turned to the married lady and said,
“Just because you did not have the chance to get it ten years ago does not
mean that you should continue to deny yourself and your family this
beautiful set of cookware for the rest of your life, does it?” She said, “No, it
doesn’t.” So I said, “I suppose you want the same set, don’t you?” She said,
“Yes, I do.”
I made the second sale because (a) I was aware it was there and (b) I
asked for the order. I’m convinced that many sales are missed not because
of poor technique but because of no technique. Ask for the order.
Those sales were two of the easiest I have ever made, and my
commissions more than paid for my ticket. As a matter of fact, later that
day I encountered that same highway patrolman, but this time I wasn’t
speeding, so I waved him down and thanked him for giving me the ticket!
I tell this story to say you should be so wrapped up in what you’re doing
you instinctively take advantage of every sales opportunity that comes your
way.

The “Nice People” Close
The more commonplace and competitive your business is, the more
important it becomes for you to develop and use your imagination. Many
times this really boils down to you, the salesperson or merchant, being
aware of your customers’ needs and concentrating on the best procedure to
meet those needs. For example, when we stopped at Tiller’s Café and Shell
Station in the little town of Chillicothe, Texas, even though the station was
self-service for gasoline, we still got a little “extra.”
When my wife and I stopped for gasoline, the lady asked for my auto
license number. Since I did not know it, I had to walk back to my car to get
it for her. She wrote my tag number on a gummed piece of white paper and

stuck it on the back of my credit card. As she did this, she explained that
now I would always have my tag number with me. Nice touch. Then she
pulled out a piece of cardboard with a sheet on it and explained that she had
listed all of her local customers so when they came in to buy, especially in
bad weather, they would not have to go back out to get their tag numbers.
Not earth-shattering, but it is one of those “little things” which brings
customers back to the store time after time. That’s career-building selling.
That is the way nice, considerate, ambitious people do things.

The “Cokes and Smokes” Close
One of the most imaginative closes I’ve ever seen was developed by Hal
Krause, the founder of American Salesmasters and later Crestcom, who
worked his way through college selling cookware, china, crystal, and
flatware to single girls. After completing the demonstration he smiled at the
prospect and said:
The story I’m about to tell in every way is true.
I’m the only man alive to share this tale with you.
You’ll know yourself that I’ve told the truth
the minute I get through,
Because I never lie or stretch the truth,
like some other salesmen do.
If you don’t buy a set of pots from me you’ll
spend all your money on
Chocolates, Cokes, filtered smokes, fancy
clothes, and picture shows,
And then you’ll look back and find that Cokes
and smokes have gone to pot,
And your bankbook will show that your cash is
shot.
What’s worse, you’ll find yourself cooking
out of thin pans and tin pans,
Lead pans and bread pans—
None of which look alike or cook alike.
So everyone says, “Well, what can I do
but buy some of those from you”—
And most of them do,
and I’ve got good news for
you— You’ve got a chance too!
If you think that’s too much high pressure,
You can even use your own pen to fill out
this order.

This combination of humor and imagination, mixed with a lot of hard
work, produced championship results.
One of the most creative and imaginative sales trainers in America was
the late Ira Hayes, who served as head of Advertising and Promotion for the
Speakers Bureau of National Cash Register (N.C.R.) before he took early
retirement in 1980 to form his own company. While Ira was with N.C.R., he
did public seminars all over America and, needless to say, his competitors
were often in attendance. This didn’t bother Ira or N.C.R., because they felt
that when you sold professionally you were not giving up a piece of your
pie. You were increasing the size of the pie so that you (in this case Ira and
N.C.R.) were still going to get more pie.
Ira also smiled and explained that sometimes he had trouble getting his
own people to use the techniques, so he wasn’t worried about his
competitors hearing his ideas. Incidentally, Ira—who was internationally
known as “America’s Ambassador of Enthusiasm”—believed in the liberal
use of one’s own picture. He had hundreds of miniature pictures made, and
when he sent a letter or passed out his business card, he always affixed his
picture to the card or correspondence. It worked. People recognized him
wherever he went.
Perhaps the most imaginative business card I have ever seen is that of
Gerhard Gschwandtner, the dynamic publisher of Personal Selling Power,
which I also highly recommend. Here is his card, along with what he says
about it:
May I present my business card:
“The phone number is on the back. Yes, just turn it around.

“Why did I put these leaders on my business card?
“There are three reasons: First, it’s an icebreaker during the opening.
“Second, it’s a reminder that good salesmanship can get you to the top. If you have
doubts, just think where these leaders would be without the ability to sell themselves.
“Third, each leader on this card stands for a characteristic that can lead you to the top.
Look at the names and see how they relate to sales success:

“A leading salesperson has the ability to be tough like a Russian, persuasive like the
president of the United States, diplomatic like the French premier, faithful like the Pope,
well organized like the German chancellor, and confident like the queen of England.”
SEE YOU AT THE TOP!

The Prospect Who Won’t Change His Mind
Sales trainer Howard Bonnell, formerly the management training director
for World Book Encyclopedia and currently a sales consultant and trainer
for many different companies, shared this with me. One day Howard was
working with a World Book representative. Howard made the presentation,
and at the conclusion the prospect said, “Well, Mr. Bonnell, let me tell you
something. We want the set of books, we need them, and our children can
get a lot of benefit from them. However, when we married fifteen years ago,
I made a flat statement that I was never going to buy anything on credit
except our house, and in fifteen years I have never gone back on my word.”
All of us have seen people like that, so broke that if it didn’t cost but fifty
cents to go around the world they couldn’t get out of sight, but they pay
cash for everything. In this particular case the prospect wasn’t quite that
broke, but his pride was at stake and Howard Bonnell, as persuasive as he
is, was not about to get that guy to change his mind. There was no way.
He’d made the statement and he was dogmatic: “I said I wasn’t going to
buy on credit and I’m not!” If Howard had tried to sell him by using every
sales technique known to man, he would have done nothing but back up in
the process. As I mentioned earlier, it is virtually impossible to get a person
to change his mind.

The “Corner” Close
What Howard had to do was get this man out of the corner and let him be
free to go ahead and make a new decision. Here’s how he did it: He looked
at the prospect and said, “Mr. Prospect, let me ask you a question. If I can
show you how to get this set of World Book right now, without paying cash,
which you’ve said you don’t have, and without going back on your word,
would you be interested?” The old boy asked, “How can you do that?”
Howard didn’t let him off the hook. He repeated. “Here’s the question. If I
can show you how to get this set of World Book today without paying cash,
without getting it on credit, and without going back on your word, would

you be interested?” The prospect said, “Yeah, how could I do that?”
Howard: “It’s really very simple.”
Then he turned to the wife, looked at her, and said, “Mrs. Prospect, as I
understand it, you did not make a commitment like your husband, did you?”
She said, “No, I didn’t.” Then Howard turned to the husband and said, “Mr.
Prospect, will it be all right if I talk with your wife about solving your
problem for you and your son?” The old boy said, “Well, whatever you can
work out with her is perfectly all right with me. Just go ahead.”
Actually, the man was delighted he’d been taken off the hook and was
able to get out of the corner. Howard enabled him to save face, which was
critical. The man recognized the need for the encyclopedias, wanted to buy
them, but would not have gotten them had Howard not been astute enough
to save face for him and make it easy for him to buy. Much of the sales
process is simply figuring out a way for the prospect to buy what you sell.
Howard astutely points out that the prospect’s objection was emotional
and illogical, but he wasn’t going to buy—period. In order to make the sale,
Howard had to appeal to his emotions. Logically, whether the man or the
wife signed the agreement didn’t matter as far as responsibility was
concerned. Emotionally, the prospect would comfortably buy because his
wife was signing so his cash record was intact. Note: His reason for buying
was for the children’s benefit. His excuse: His wife did it—not him.
Many of these closes and procedures involve the use of your imagination,
letting your prospect see logically and emotionally what you’re offering and
urging him to make a new decision. I emphasize there is seldom a sales call
or interview in which everything comes off according to “Hoyle,” or
exactly as projected on the drawing board. However, if you’ve got the
guidelines and if you build reserves of knowledge which are instantly at
your disposal, your imagination is free to work. As a result, you’ll make
more sales, and you’ll build your career faster and more successfully.

Imagination in Time Usage
One of the most time-conscious, dedicated, and imaginative salesmen I
have ever known is Hal Krause. When Hal founded American Salesmasters
he had two major objectives. His first goal was to make the company the
biggest and best sales training organization of its kind in the world. Not

only did Hal achieve this objective, but along the way American
Salesmasters was awarded the prestigious President’s E. Award, which is
awarded to a handful of America’s top export companies.
As an aside, I might reinforce what I said in chapter 12 about the sales
profession and free enterprise. As a young man of modest circumstances,
Hal not only worked his way through college selling hope chest items to
single girls but was also able to accumulate a substantial nest egg in the
process. He used this capital to launch a successful business career founded
on the principles which made America great. He truly is a wholesome
personification of the American dream, and he got his start in the sales
profession.
Hal’s second goal was to sell his company and “retire” before he was
forty. Three weeks before his fortieth birthday he reached his second goal.
In “retirement” Hal has served as the Republican National Committeeman
for the Republican party in Colorado, looked after some diverse business
interests, and conducted financial seminars around the world. Hal does
many things successfully because of hard work, imagination, and time
management.

The “Time Utilization” Close
Example: While serving as president of American Salesmasters, Hal once
had about an hour’s stop between flights in a large city.
The home office for a major insurance company was close to the airport,
so Hal took a taxi on the chance he could see a decision maker at the
company. He gave the receptionist his card and said, “I’m between planes
and I do not have an appointment, but if at all possible I would like to see
the president.”
This company utilized a speaker system built into the telephone, so the
receptionist, with Hal listening, called the president and told him that Mr.
Hal Krause of American Salesmasters would like to see him. Instead of
answering back on the telephone so he could not be heard, the president,
slightly annoyed, responded on the speaker system and said, “Tell the
young man I am busy and I work only by appointment.”

Hal and the receptionist heard the response and the receptionist was a
little embarrassed. Hal just smiled and asked the receptionist to press the
proper button so he could respond directly to the president’s comments. She
complied with the request and Hal said, “Sir, my name is Hal Krause. May I
ask you just one question?” Insurance company president: “Yes.” Hal: “In
your training program, do you train your salespeople, when they have an
hour between appointments, to utilize that time by making cold calls?”
Insurance company president (after a long pause): “Mr. Krause, because
you’ve asked the right question, I want to talk with you. Come on in.”
Hal utilized the time effectively. He laid the groundwork on this call, and
a follow-up call produced a substantial order.

The “Question” Close
Effective sales procedures work everywhere. Mike Bhag, who worked
with the sponsor of the Dale Carnegie courses in England, listened to the
Hal Krause example on a cassette recording. Here in his own words is how
Mike put the information to work for himself:
It was 1:40 on a hot Friday afternoon. I had just driven into town for a two o’clock
appointment. I had twenty minutes to kill; since there are 1,440 minutes in a day, I
decided to turn dead time into quality time and make a cold call. I spotted a large car
showroom, gave myself a pep talk, and walked in.
I asked the salesman, “Is the boss in?” He replied, “No.” Not to be deterred I said, “If
he were in, where would he be?” “Across the street,” he answered. I walked onto the
premises across the street, into the reception area, and said to the receptionist, “The boss
isn’t in, is he?”
“Oh, yes he is; he’s in his office in front of you.” The boss was in a meeting with his
sales manager and overheard the receptionist. He looked my way. I walked in and said,
“As managing director of this company, you’re probably always looking for ways to
increase sales, aren’t you?”
I did not get a chance to continue as he said, “Young man, can’t you see I’m very
busy? It’s Friday afternoon! It’s lunchtime! Tell me, I’m curious, what makes you call at
this particular time?”
I confidently looked him straight in the eye and said, “Do you really want to know?”
“Yes, I’m curious,” he replied. “Well,” I said, “I’ve just driven in from Reading. My next
appointment is at 2:00 p.m. I’ve got twenty minutes to kill, so I thought I would turn
dead time into productive time and make a cold call.” Then I lowered my voice and
asked slowly, “Isn’t that what you teach your salesmen to do?”
At that his mouth dropped. He looked at his sales manager in amazement and awe,
smiled, and said to me warmly, “Sit down, young man, sit down!” By the time I finished
I had made a large sale involving sales-and-management training for his company.

Fantastic, Mike! Excellent use of your time and your imagination, not to
mention the fact that you tailored the script to fit your situation and asked
six questions to get into an actual interview.

22
Using Word Pictures to Sell
Most—no, change that to all—ambitiously aggressive salespeople are
always on the lookout for the magic word, the key phrase, or the new
technique that will give them a persuasive edge and leave the prospect
powerless to resist. Fortunately, no such “weapon” exists, but there are
many words, phrases, and techniques you can learn and use which will
enable you to present your offer in a more attractive light. The result is a
more persuasive presentation which will enable you to persuade more—but
not all—of your prospects to take action.
To some hard-liners this will sound like heresy, but I am convinced the
moment you recognize that not everyone could or should buy your product
or services, you will sell to more of those who can and should buy.
You do not enhance your reputation or build your career by overloading
your prospects or by browbeating a nonprospect into buying something he
really doesn’t want, doesn’t need, or can’t afford. Once you clearly
understand that basic premise, it will be easier for you to forgive yourself
for missing a sale you thought you should have made. This frees your mind
to give maximum effort to the next sales interview.
Careful. This involves some common sense and mature judgment.
Otherwise you might rationalize that everyone who does not buy really isn’t
a prospect. From a sales career point of view, that would be a fatal mistake.
Now let’s look at some words and procedures which the legitimate
salesperson, selling a legitimate product at a fair price, can use to persuade
legitimate prospects to take action in their own best interests.

Twenty-Four Words That Sell

My friend, sales trainer Thom Norman from Scottsdale, Arizona, was one
of the most comprehensive sales trainers in America. Thom’s specialty was
the telephone, but he did considerable work and research in other fields. For
example, he identified twenty-four words that sell and twenty-four words
that “unsell.” Thom agreed to share these words with us. I encourage you to
memorize and learn them by getting a good dictionary and finding out
exactly what each one means. From the list I promise you at least a halfdozen pleasant learning surprises when you pursue them in a dictionary.
The first word that sells is your prospect’s name. I think everyone
recognizes this as being true. His name is the sweetest sound of them all.
You should use it from time to time throughout your presentation. Here are
the other twenty-three.
understand
money
right
deserve
proven
safety
results
happy
health
save
truth
trust
easy
new
comfort
value
guarantee
love
proud
fun
discovery
profit
vital

Note: Yale University has added five words to Thom’s twenty-four
selling words: YOU, SECURITY, ADVANTAGE, POSITIVE, and
BENEFITS.
Thom also has researched and come up with twenty-four words that
“unsell,” and here they are:
deal
lose
sold
obligation
cost
hurt
price
liable
pay
buy
decision
fail
contract
death
hard
liability
sign
bad
difficult
failure
try
sell
worry
loss
I encourage you to give these words the same dictionary treatment.
Obviously, there are many additional words that are soothing to the
prospect’s ears, and others which leave the prospect in neutral or even turn
him off. I share Billie Engman’s dislike for the word pitch, and most people
prefer home to house and a fine automobile instead of a nice car. It’s easier
to get a prospect to OK an agreement than it is to sign a con- tract, and

more people prefer to invest instead of buy. They find it easier to make a
deposit each month than to make a payment.
Words and phrases which paint word pictures can sell effectively for you
and your company. For example, in North Carolina the highway patrol took
a positive and imaginative approach with their roadside signs which
proclaimed, “North Carolina uses radar to protect you from speeding
drivers.” The picture is clear, isn’t it?

Watch Those Words
One reason I encouraged you to record your sales presentation (see
chapter 5) is to help you recognize the positive and the negative aspects of
the words, phrases, and word patterns you use. You know, one of the things,
you know, that will drive a prospect up the wall, you know, is the use of you
know. It’s hard to imagine, you know, but some people actually, you know,
use the words you know as many times in conversation as I have used them
in these last two sentences. Nothing is more distracting to a prospect than
hearing you know in every sentence. And you know that’s true, don’t you?
Another negative and distracting phrase is the constant use of “Do you
understand what I mean?” or “You know what I mean?” Too many of those
little goodies and your prospect will start counting the number of times you
use them. Since he can’t count and concentrate at the same time, your
persuasiveness will be adversely affected.
Of all the negative words, easily the most negative and destructive are the
obscene, vulgar, and profane ones. And a sure way of committing sales
suicide with many prospects (that would certainly include me) is to take
God’s name in vain. Question: Have you ever heard of anyone buying
anything from a salesman because he used gutter language or took God’s
name in vain? Fact: Many people don’t buy because of the use of those
objectionable words. Question: Since the prospect doesn’t buy because of
those profane or vulgar words and might not buy because of them, doesn’t it
make sense to leave them out?
Again, Again, and Yet Again. John Shedd, a great sales manager, said,
“We don’t need to be told—but we do need to be reminded.” Throughout
this book I’ve been painting and will continue to paint pictures in your mind
with words. As you think back on what you’ve read (remember me buying

the car, the house, the shoe shine, Columbus’s trip, etc.), you will remember
the word pictures I’ve been painting. For the remainder of the book you will
be even more sensitive to the number and effectiveness of the word pictures
I paint. Another reason I encourage you to read this book several times is to
saturate your mind with word pictures until their use becomes second nature
to you.
In the world of selling you’ve got to understand two things if you expect
to become a real sales professional. First, the mind thinks in pictures. For
example, if I say “car,” you do not think “c-a-r.” In your mind’s eye you see
a car, and it is probably a beautiful car. If I say “girl,” you do not think “g-ir-l,” but fellows, in your mind’s eye you will see a beautiful girl. If I say
“house,” as a reader or a listener you would not think “h-o-u-s-e,” but rather
you would, in your mind’s eye, see a house. If I say “home,” you do not
think “h-o-m-e,” but you see a home with a family in it, whereas the house
you saw in your mind just two seconds ago was empty. The master
salesperson takes a verbal paintbrush and instinctively uses full words like
home instead of empty words like house.
Number two, if you’re going to sell more of your goods, products,
services, or ideas, you’ve got to learn how to take the verbal paintbrush and
paint them (your prospects) right into the picture. You’ve got to put your
prospect in the car and show him enjoying the luxury, comfort, or economy
of driving your particular car. You’ve got to paint the picture of satisfaction
and gratification of him grilling the steak on his grill on a beautiful spring,
summer, or fall evening in the backyard of the home you are showing him.
The picture must be (a) in color and (b) in the present tense.

The “Picture” Close
The New York Times printed a story of how a New Jersey housewife’s
feeling for her home, combined with her sense of what makes good
advertising copy, in one day sold a home that five brokers had been
carrying for three months. Mr. and Mrs. Lowe decided to sell their twobedroom home to buy a larger one since space was becoming a problem.
The brokers ran typical, standard ads like “Cozy six-room home, ranch style
with fireplace, garage, tile baths, all hot water heat, convenient to Rutgers
campus, stadium, golf courses, and primary school.” Those are facts, but

people do not buy facts or even benefits unless they can see those benefits
translated to their own personal use.
After three months Mrs. Lowe ran an ad herself. She was anxious to get
something done and believed she could sell her home. Here’s the way the ad
ran:
We’ll Miss Our Home
We’ve been happy in it but two bedrooms are not enough for us, so we must move. If
you like to be cozy by a fire while you admire autumn woods through wide windows,
protected from the street, if you like a shady yard in summer, a clear view of winter
sunsets, and quiet enough to hear frogs in spring, but city utilities and conveniences, you
might like to buy our home. We hope so. We don’t want it to be empty and alone at
Christmas.

Out of the six responses the next day, one person bought the home.
Now look back at those word pictures. Block off the first sentence and
you can see a happy family crowded together in a nice home which is just
too small for the current owners. You immediately see that there is nothing
wrong with the home. The problem is too many occupants. IMPORTANT:
Slow down and take the rest of that ad on a phrase-by-phrase basis. There
are seven additional pictures, a total of eight pictures in the eighty-six words
in the body of the ad. Now tell yourself the truth. Did you see the other
picture in the heading—or was it so obvious you missed it? That’s the
reason I keep telling you to study this book a number of times.
This ad or “sales talk” painted a beautiful picture of the features and
benefits the Lowes had enjoyed as owners, but it did even more. It promised
the new owners they would inherit the same beauty, benefits, and
enjoyment. It painted a beautiful picture of happiness, contentment, and
security which the new owners would inherit.
You probably noticed that Mrs. Lowe advertised her “home,” not her
“house.” The difference between a house and a home is love. The new
owners could undoubtedly sense the love the Lowes had for their “home.”
They didn’t want to buy a house to occupy. They wanted to invest in a home
to live in. Yes, words do make a difference, don’t they?
Ideally, word pictures should either paint beauty, luxury, love,
satisfaction, enjoyment, success, performance, or the features painted by
Mrs. Lowe. Obviously, most pictures will paint a combination of features

and benefits, but all word pictures must paint the prospect in the picture for
maximum effectiveness. Almost without exception, every product or
service can be sold by painting word pictures, especially if the pictures are
in the present tense. As I’ve previously stated, we think in pictures and we
buy pictures if we are painted into the picture as satisfied customers.

Picture-Painting Selling Is Good Postselling
One of the most effective users of word pictures was the late Fred
Herman. Here is a story told by Fred as he demonstrated the use of word
pictures in front of live audiences. I had the privilege of seeing Fred do this
on several occasions, and his widow, Kay Herman, supplied me with a
cassette recording of his presentation to refresh my memory. Since I had the
advantage of both seeing and hearing the presentation, I’ll set the stage as
we go, but the words will be Fred Herman’s.
Fred (to audience): “People do not buy products or services—they buy
pictures of the end result of using the product or service. Let me give you
an example. I need somebody who has a boy about five or six years old to
come up and help me.”
Fred to participant in audience holding up hand: “How old is your oldest
boy?” Participant: “Twelve.” Fred: “Twelve. OK, that’s all right, come on
up here. What’s his name?” Participant: “Michael.” Fred: “And your name
is . . . ?” Participant: “Bob.” Fred: “Bob, I appreciate your coming up here.
Bob, we came out here not to talk about insurance or investments but to talk
about how to get Michael a college education. You’d spend a few minutes
on that, wouldn’t you?” Bob: “Sure can.”
In this drama Fred explains that the insurance representative describes
the insurance program and its benefits. Then he says to the audience: “So
we’ve talked about a program. We’ve provided the solution. We worked out
some sort of a program so there’d be cash value at a certain time, but I’d
say, ‘Bob, as we’ve been working together here it’s become completely
apparent to me that one of the drives inside of you is that Michael will have
the tools and equipment so that he can meet life and whip it, is that right?’
Bob: ‘That’s correct.’ Fred: ‘Well, this program we’ve worked out will take
care of this regardless of what might happen. Here’s what does happen.

“It’s about maybe eight or nine years from now. An invitation comes
through the mail from the college of Michael’s choice. You and your wife
go to the graduation ceremonies. You enter the hall, and there’s a
tremendous babble of voices, a feeling of human warmth; it all hushes
down as you hear the graduation processional, hear the swish of robes as
you see those little tassels bouncing on the hats. You notice your wife’s
face. Big smile on it, but there’s just the suggestion of a tear in the corner of
her eye. And you kind of grab her hand and she holds your hand; you’re
completely enthralled in the culmination of years of hoping and planning
and dreaming.
“It’s over now. You watch Mike go across and get his diploma. He’s
walking up the aisle, he’s looking for you and your wife; he spies you.
There’s a big smile on his face. You feel the warmth of his handclasp, you
feel his arm around your shoulder, and he says, ‘Gee, Dad, I’ll never forget
you for this.’ This is what you want, isn’t it, Bob?” “Yeah.”
Corny? Only if you, the salesperson, don’t really feel the emotion the
parents felt. I might also add that this procedure is good postselling, too. It
helps to ensure the sale because you are selling the results of the sale. I
might also point out that the parents are getting some now benefits in peace
of mind by knowing their son’s college education is secure.
Almost regardless of what you sell, you can and should paint a picture
the prospect can see and feel. Since many of the benefits, in this case, are
delayed for years, it is important that an emotional picture of those delayed
benefits be burned indelibly into that prospect’s mind. This greatly reduces
the possibility of cancellation.
The impact of picture selling is vividly clear and explains why Charles
Osgood of CBS News was moved to say, “A picture is a pitiful thing next to
words and imagination.” To make certain you didn’t miss it, I must also
point out that the dialogue also contained six questions. Good selling and
good closing by good salespeople will always include several facets of the
sales presentation.
When Fred was making this presentation, life insurance with cash value
was very popular and practical for many young parents. Today we deal with
different products (term insurance in combination with mutual funds,

common stock, the money market, CDs, etc.), but the technique and
procedure are the same. You adapt the procedures to fit your product or
service.
As sales trainer John Hammond points out, when a person makes a
significant purchase of any kind, he generally makes that purchase only
after he has gone through the picture-painting process in his own mind. As
a professional you need to help the prospect with the picture-painting
process.

The “Preparation” Close
A good friend of mine, the late Dr. Emol Fails, a former professor at
North Carolina State University, did a considerable amount of work with
many Chambers of Commerce. He convinced them they needed to have
sales clinics for the retail salespeople in stores in their area to teach them
how to capitalize on the sales opportunities that many, if not most of them,
were missing.
To prove the point that they needed training, Dr. Fails took his wallet,
tied it to the back of his car, and dragged it around town for several days
until it was in tatters. Then he put his credit cards, money, and driver’s
license in it. Next, he would go into a men’s store and buy a necktie, which
as a general rule is located reasonably close to a display of wallets. He
would take his wallet out of his pocket and “accidentally” drop it. Money,
credit cards, and wallet would scatter all over the floor.
In one small town the same thing happened in five different stores. The
clerks would always help him pick up the pieces. Sometimes they would
look down their noses at that disgraceful thing he called a wallet, but not a
single one suggested that in addition to the necktie a new wallet might also
be considered.
The picture Dr. Fails painted was crystal clear. The need for sales training
was acute. The benefits to the people, the merchants, and the Chamber of
Commerce could easily be visualized by the Chamber official.
It is my firm conviction that by using your imagination you can paint
effective pictures for your prospects. In Dr. Fails’s case, the preparation
(dragging the wallet behind his car and calling on the five stores) for the

sales call on the Chamber official took ten times as long as the actual call.
This supports Abraham Lincoln’s statement, “If I had nine hours to cut
down a tree, I would spend six hours sharpening my axe.” Selling is not
easy, but proper preparation makes it easier and far more rewarding.
Incidentally, this is true in all fields of endeavor. The trial attorney
spends hundreds of hours in study, investigation, and preparation for every
hour he spends in the courtroom. Ditto for the surgeon, the professional
athlete, and the professional salesperson. The great racehorse Nashua won
over one million dollars in less than one hour of racing, but he spent
hundreds of hours in training to know how to perform in all kinds of
weather and under all track conditions. With proper preparation and by
being in great physical and mental shape to run the proper pace, accelerate
when needed, and go all out when necessary, he was able to take advantage
of every opportunity.
I think you get the picture! When you train in the art of professional
closing in relationship to the time a professional football team prepares for
Sunday or a boxer prepares for a match (not to mention the championship),
you’ll begin to realize a tremendous jump in your closing ratio on the
regular calls and a good boost in the close ones—which most people in
sales have always missed.

The “Fear” Close
Fred Herman used one of the fastest and most effective word pictures
I’ve ever heard of. He conducted a training program for a major oil
company and trained their service station attendants. (This was years ago
when service stations gave service!) Fred’s primary purpose was to teach
the attendants how to sell more oil. (In those days, help was plentiful and
service stations were desperately trying to sell more oil.)
When the attendant lifted the hood and checked the oil, Fred taught him
to go to the driver and say, “You need five quarts.” Fred properly identified
this as fear motivation. It paints a vivid word picture, doesn’t it? It’s easy to
visualize the fear in the prospect’s mind, because the instant the attendant
said, “You need five quarts,” the car owner could visualize a serious engine
problem. Most people expect the worst, and the thought of his car burning
those five quarts of oil was pretty frightening.

Fred said the car owner would come unglued and bound out of that
driver’s seat in a hurry! “What do you mean, I need five quarts?” Then the
attendant calmly said, “Your oil is awfully dirty and should be changed
before it damages your motor. It won’t take but a minute and you’ll be on
your way.” (That last sentence is another word picture, isn’t it?)

You Sell What It Does
You need to paint the picture of your prospect using and enjoying the
goods or services you sell. When you become completely aware of this
process and the benefits that go with it, you will work at doing it until
picture selling becomes second nature for you.
Make yourself a mental note to check the word pictures I paint for you
throughout the remainder of this book. Remind yourself in your second and
subsequent readings of Secrets of Closing the Sale to look for the word
pictures. Incidentally, I remind you again that you will glean more ideas,
make more notes, and mark the book more on your second reading than you
will on your first and still more on your third than on your second.
Throughout the book the picture painted is that of satisfaction and
gratification. The reason is simple. You don’t sell what the product is— you
always sell what the product does. Example: Each year over 5 million
quarter-inch drills are sold, yet it’s safe to say that nobody wants a quarterinch drill. They want a quarter-inch hole.
Each year billions of dollars worth of cosmetics are sold, yet it’s safe to
say that nobody wants lipstick, eye shadow, blush, etc. What they want is a
more attractive appearance. They want to smell good and to be glamorous
and desirable to members of the opposite sex.

You don’t sell what the product is— you sell what it does.
Watch the ads on television and you’ll hear word pictures and see the actual
picture of the users of the product enjoying the benefits of the product.

The “Postselling” Close

Thom Norman painted word pictures with a letter. He trained salespeople
to write the customer after the sale was made. This is postselling, which is
often overlooked in sales training. Its importance should be obvious,
because once you’ve made the sale, you need to keep it sold.
Thom encouraged his clients to do the same thing he did for many years
when he was in the field of direct selling. He urged salespeople to write a
letter the evening, or no later than the day after, the sale has been made,
whether the sale was made in a home or office.
Thom insisted that the letter be handwritten. It’s all right to use company
stationery, but it is very important that you hand address the envelope and
put a postage stamp on it, since it is more personal than a postage meter.
The letter says, “A personal note to thank you for your courtesy and the
trust and confidence you placed in me yesterday [or today, whichever day
you are writing the letter]. I very much enjoyed visiting with you and your
family. I am proud that you are now using our product or service and know
that you will benefit and be pleased with the results. I shall be in touch with
you in the future to see if I can be of any additional service. In the
meantime, if you should need or want assistance of any kind, please feel
free to contact me.”
This letter paints a lot of pictures and gives the new customer some
sincere “strokes” and assurance that he did the right thing:
Thank you for your courtesy.
I enjoyed visiting.
I am proud of you.
You will benefit and be pleased.
I shall be in touch if you need or want assistance.

He was painting the picture of a salesperson who cares, who appreciates
your business, who is going to look after your needs as they arise. He was
assuring the customer that “just because you made the purchase doesn’t
mean I’m going to lose interest.” He was painting a picture of a salesperson
who is people- and service-oriented. That is the way you make more sales
and build a solid sales career in the process.

23
Picture Selling for Bigger,
Permanent Sales
The “Repetition” Close
Now I’m going to stick my neck out just a little, although not very much,
because you’ve heard this one so many times. I’m going to give you a word
picture and then I want you to write in the product name before you look
below for the answer. “The pause that refreshes.” ____________. Even
though it’s been over forty years since they’ve used it, the picture is still
clearly in your mind. Next picture: A group of young people playing,
laughing, singing, running, and just having a marvelous time. Which
generation are they? ____________. Now we see an athlete performing and
then sitting down for the “Breakfast of Champions.” Which cereal?
_____________.
In each one of these examples the company or product, through repetition
and the use of word pictures, has built name recognition while conditioning
us to expect a particular result when we buy those products. These
repetitions and “pictures” are strong invitations for us to get a Coke, a
Pepsi, or a bowl of Wheaties.
If your presentation or demonstration is fifteen minutes or longer, you
need to build in repetitive benefit phrases which suggest that those who buy
from you enjoy certain benefits which those who don’t buy from you can
never enjoy. These phrases should have continuity: “This tightly seals all
escapes”; “This keeps the heat out and the cold in”; “Electricity savings are
substantial”; “The money you save is yours, not the utility company’s”;
“Invest your savings in your future.”

Every Good Salesperson Paints Pictures
Good mechanics and conscientious doctors all do exactly the same thing.
The doctor says, “It’s not cancer—yet.” The mechanic says, “No, I don’t
think you need a major overhaul—yet.” The word yet paints a picture of
fear in the prospect’s mind.
Question: Would you want a doctor who wouldn’t put a little fear into
your heart that if you didn’t do something, that benign tumor might become
cancerous? Would you want a mechanic who wouldn’t let you know that if
you didn’t replace your brake pads fairly soon, you’d end up spending five
times as much money?
Thinking as a salesperson/customer, what do you think about the
salesman who is not aggressively concerned enough about the customer to
take a certain amount of risk in actively encouraging the prospect to make
one or two more purchases to increase the effectiveness or enjoyment of the
purchases already made? Motive is the key word. If you encourage the
prospect to buy more merchandise solely because you can earn more, you
are a “peddler.” If you encourage the prospect to buy more items for his
benefit, you are a “professional,” and both of you benefit.
When you paint that prospect into the picture and tie the companion
selling to it, you’re going to sell more merchandise—and cut down on the
travel and shopping time of your customer. It is true—you can have
everything in life you want if you will just help enough other people get
what they want.

The “Menu” Close
One of the most liberal uses of picture-painting words I’ve ever seen is
the menu for the Hyatt hotels. I’m looking at one from Indianapolis,
Indiana, and the descriptive adjectives they use really paint beautiful
pictures to “close” you on ordering not just this one food item but more
different items. Their imagination certainly ran rampant on these. Here are a
few samples.
The heading is “Sensuous Salads. California Painter’s Palate. A colorful
array of the season’s freshest berries, bananas, melons, pineapples, and

grapes surrounding separate scoops of frozen yogurt and cottage cheese on
a palate of watermelon.”
Or get a load of this one: “Spinach Supreme. A tumultuous arrangement
of fresh spinach leaves mingled with enok mushrooms, crisp chips of
bacon, and ripe tomato, with our superb hot honey bacon dressing.”
And this one is not bad either: “For Protein Lovers. Mr. Chopped Sirloin
conducts an orchestra of fresh vegetables, fruits, and eggs to an audience of
shredded lettuce with an accompaniment of frozen yogurt and cottage
cheese.”
Here’s another. “The Tivoli. A bountiful garden sandwich of fresh
avocado sprouts, Swiss cheese, tomato, and head lettuce on honey wheat
bread amidst a symphony of fresh, raw vegetables with our Esquire Sauce
for dipping.”
The Rusty Scupper® doesn’t do badly, either. Just look at the next
twenty-nine words. “Crab and Cheddar. A feast worthy of King Neptune
himself! A generous helping of crab salad under melted cheddar cheese, all
grilled and served open-face on sourdough bread.”
This one is short and sweet, too. “Avocado, Shrimp, and Bacon. Tasting
is believing! Tempting avocado and Pacific bay shrimp topped with
Canadian bacon comes to you open-face on sourdough bread. French fries
come along, too.”
Yes, sir, those folks really are word merchants. They know how to throw
the words around to describe their food, and since I’ve eaten at both these
places on several different occasions, I’m here to tell you they deliver what
they sell. It’s good!

The “Oooh and Aaah” Close
During the years I worked with Bernie Lofchick and World Wide
Distributors, I was presented with many unusual opportunities. Never will I
forget when World Wide started selling fine Bavarian china. Bernie had
gone to Germany and negotiated an agreement with a manufacturer of
beautiful Bavarian china. He was permitted to select his own patterns and
even had some specifically created for his company. This presented a rather
unique opportunity for the use of word pictures and imagination.

In selling hope chest items to single girls, the “romance” or “story”
associated with any pattern presented was especially important. Everything
was in place and all set for all of the patterns except one, which was a
unique and beautiful pattern; but without the proper presentation Bernie felt
it would not be accepted in the marketplace.
At the eleventh hour, the night before the convention when the new china
was to be presented, Bernie and I finally came up with an idea. On the day
of the convention we presented the china to the sales audience and they
were wildly enthusiastic about the quality and beauty, as well as the finer
points involved with a truly quality product. One by one the different
patterns were presented, and since a matter of taste is always involved, the
various salespeople responded to the different patterns according to their
own taste preferences.
When the magic moment arrived for this one pattern to be presented, I
paused, looked at the audience, smiled, and said, “Now, folks, just before
you take this pattern from your sample case and show it to the girl, here’s
what you want to say. Look at her, smile broadly, and say, ‘Now, Mary, this
next pattern is what we call the “Oooh and Aaah” pattern. We call it that
because when a girl sees this one she either says “Oooh” or “Aaah,” which
is exactly the same thing your dinner guests will be saying for the rest of
your life as you use this pattern.’ ”
At that point I removed the dinner plate from the sample case, held it up
in front of the audience, and sure enough—without exception— everyone
there said either “Oooh” or “Aaah.” This particular pattern became a
runaway best-seller and World Wide Distributors sold more than twice as
much of this pattern as they did any of the other patterns. This might have
happened in any event, but Bernie Lofchick is absolutely convinced that the
introduction of the pattern to the entire sales force with that little touch is
what made the difference.

You Can Use It This Way
Again, I urge you to adapt this approach to your own situation. For
example, if you’re in a ladies’ apparel shop and your prospect has been
having difficulty choosing the right dress or outfit, I encourage you to have
an “Oooh” or “Aaah” outfit. If you are perceptive, by the time you have

spent a few minutes with your prospect, you will have a feel for what she
really likes. Most of the finer shops have those unique outfits that were
“made for” the particular shopper. However, many times the prospect is
indecisive and vacillates between choosing one outfit over another. At the
right moment—and that definitely is not the first three or four outfits you
show—when your prospect shows she is a little confused as to what to
purchase, you say to her, “I just remembered something which I believe is
what you’re looking for. As a matter of fact, let me tell you that when your
husband [or boyfriend] sees you in this, he’s probably going to say either
‘Oooh’ or “Aaah.’ ” Then smilingly say, “So in reality this is our ‘Oooh’ or
‘Aaah’ outfit.” Obviously, this approach will fit some prospects better than
others.
The same basic approach can be used when you have a particularly
gorgeous view in a home you’re showing or when you’re selling a fine
automobile with a unique appearance. This approach would also be
applicable in the sale of fine jewelry, inspiring paintings, beautiful furniture,
or any number of other items which we all merchandise. You could even
expand it to a set of golf clubs. The salesperson, in explaining the clubs, can
smilingly say to the prospect, “When you hit this driver off the tee, the rest
of the foursome will probably say ‘Oooh’ or ‘Aaah.’ ”
Warm, descriptive words paint pictures, and those pictures and sounds do
have a substantial impact on the buyer’s decision whether or not to buy.
Yes, words do make a difference, so you, too, need to be a “word
merchant.” You must learn to use them in an effective picture-painting
process in order to utilize the potential you have and reach your peak as a
sales professional.

PART 5

The Nuts and Bolts of Selling
OBJECTIVES
To sell you on the benefits of objections and teach you how to cash in on
them in the marketplace.
To teach you how to identify the different kinds of prospects and how to
deal with them as individuals.
To demonstrate the question-asking technique and give you specific
questions to use under sales circumstances.
To encourage you to be a little bold—or even audacious—in the sales
process under some circumstances.
CLOSES AND/OR PROCEDURES
The “Assumptive” Close Revisited
The “Trial” Close
The “Four Question” Close
The “Talking Pad” Close
The “Safety Valve” or “Punt and Pray” Close
The “Alternate of Choice” Close Revisited
The “Wheeler Which” Close
The “Obligation” Close
The “Similar Product” Close
The “Right Experience” Close
The “Deserve It” Close
The “Reason-Excuse” Close

The “Choice” Close
The “Tie Down” Close Revisited
The “Permanent Customer” Close
The “Disclosure” Close
The “Minor Decision” Close
The “Tennis Racket” Close
The “Ben Franklin” Close
The “Pedestal” Close
The “Hat in Hand” Close
The “Mother” Close
The “Pressure Permission” Close

24
Objections—The Key
to Closing the Sale
The very word objection strikes fear in the hearts of insecure and/or
beginning salespeople. In reality it should create excitement, because as I
will repeat a little later, the indication of an objection is an expression of
interest, and that’s the first thing a salesperson should be looking for.
There are as many different kinds of objections as there are kinds of
prospects, so there are many approaches and variations in the way you
handle each one of them. The subject is both broad and deep and is one of
the most important covered in this book. I urge you to combine and adapt
this information with your own company materials and applications, as well
as explore the subject with sales leaders in your own industry.

Selling on Objections
I can state with considerable confidence that in most cases involving
significant purchases, if you do not encounter objections from the prospect
when you make your presentation, you do not have a prospect. When your
prospect raises an objection, you ought to grin internally and think to
yourself, Oh, boy! I’ve got a live one today! Just remember, if all the
benefits and values of your product were obvious to the prospect, the
salesperson (that’s you) would not be necessary. Also remember that if
everybody instantly bought your product, commission rates would drop
dramatically.

No Objections—No Prospect

For example, if you were to call on me selling scuba-diving equipment,
I’d never raise an objection to the equipment. If you offered to sell me the
complete outfit, guaranteed for fifty years for $9.95, I would never object
because I have no interest.
If you were to try to sell me golf clubs, I might object by saying, “That
shaft is too stiff [or not stiff enough].” A comment like that should bring a
grin, because then you can say, “What you need is our new graphite shaft.”
If a person is interested in what you are selling, he is, in most cases, going
to offer some kind of an objection, so when the prospect raises an objection,
you ought to get excited.
As far as objections are concerned, the question most frequently asked is,
“When should you answer the objection?” Actually, there are four times to
handle objections: (1) before they occur, (2) when they occur, (3) later, and
(4) never. On the last one, however, let me explain something. The
objection might seem frivolous or irrelevant to you, but if the prospect
raises it the second time, you can rest assured it is important to him. You’d
better handle the objection at that time or he will feel that you are ignoring
it, that you have either no interest in him or no answer to the objection.
As we deal with objections, let me emphatically state that I believe a
highly motivated, skilled, professional salesperson can strip a prospect of
all objections and make him look and feel utterly ridiculous if he doesn’t
buy. With this procedure a salesman can intimidate or “high pressure” some
prospects into buying. I also believe that some salesmen can be so
persuasive and charming they can “hypnotize” their prospects into buying
products, goods, or services which are not needed or are grossly overpriced.
However, no salesman is so hypnotic in his presentation that he can keep
the prospect hypnotized and feeling good about the purchase until the
product is delivered and paid for.
With this in mind, I’m convinced high-pressure or overpriced sales are
easily the two worst things which can happen to a sales career. In either
case the sale will probably be canceled, and neither approach will build
customers, which is a must if you are going to build a sales career.
Along these lines, retired communications and time-management expert
Dan Bellus says too many salespeople make the mistake of thinking the

sales process is a “win” for the salesman and a “loss” for the customer. With
this attitude, Dan says, the salesman gets the feeling he’s got to “defeat” the
other person. He then raises the question, “Can you honestly expect
someone you just ‘defeated’ to buy something from you?”
The communication process demands that we approach the handling of
objections in a convincing manner rather than a “defeating” manner. Our
objective is not to defeat but to convince and then persuade. The point at
which we “defeat” someone is the point at which we lose understanding and
communication and, hence, the sale. He gives this example:
A tourist was watching two Asians in Hong Kong who were really going at each other
hot and heavy with language which almost turned the air blue! As they stood there, the
observer asked the Asian guide, “What are they talking about?” The guide said, “They’re
having a discussion about ownership of a boat.” The tourist said, “They’re getting so
wrought up, aren’t they going to start fighting pretty soon?” The guide said, “No, they’ll
never start fighting because each one of them knows the man who strikes the first blow
admits his ideas just gave out.”

The same thing happens when we let a conversation develop into an
argument. When we start arguing, our ideas have just given out.
Communication—or in this case persuasion—no longer takes place.
To properly set the stage for dealing with objections, let me explain by
way of analogy what my brother, who was one of the top sales trainers in
the country, had to say. Judge explained that some people won’t buy
because the night train no longer runs from Buffalo to New York City. You
might reasonably ask what the night train from Buffalo to New York City
has to do with your prospect’s not buying from you. Obviously, as Judge
said, it has nothing to do with his not buying from you, but if a prospect
does not want to buy, one excuse is as good as another.
Message: Give every call your very best. Make every effort to extend
your goods, products, and services to the person you’re dealing with. But if
he does not buy, do not beat yourself to death as a result of it. Walk away
and mentally prepare yourself to make the next sale on the next call.
Remember that you haven’t failed on the sales call unless you let it
negatively affect your attitude on your next sales call.

Answer in Advance

First, let’s look at the best time to answer the objection—which is before
it occurs. Incidentally, if you are consistently getting the same objections
after your presentation, it is a sure sign your presentation is in trouble. You
need to analyze the presentation so you will be able to handle most
objections in the body of the presentation. This approach enables you to
answer the objection before it occurs, which means you are selling on the
offense instead of defensively responding. This is far more positive and
effective.
Here are a couple of examples of how to handle your objections in the
body of the presentation before the prospect verbalizes them.
Years ago I sold a food machine. You probably saw these machines
demonstrated on television, at the state fairs and food shows, or in local
department stores. After demonstrating the machine for several months, I
could flat make it talk! I’d put that food in the hopper and it came out about
ninety miles an hour, sliced, diced, cubed, minced, waffled, shredded,
chipped, curled, shoestrung, etc.
The group of prospects would sit or stand around “ooohing” and
“aaahing” as the food came tumbling from the hopper in precise order.
However, two objections would almost always arise. Generally one of the
husbands would lean over and whisper to his wife in a voice you could only
hear about three blocks away, “Yeah, he can make that machine do tricks,
but I’ll bet if you bought one you could never do that!” That was a standard
objection, followed in short order by another when one of the ladies would
comment, “It looks to me like you’d cut your hand on that thing, too!”

Make It Believable
These objections were so standard we knew we had to deal with them
positively and in advance if we were going to sell the machines in quantity.
Here is the way Harry Lemmons, the founder and president of The
Saladmaster Corporation, taught me to handle this one. When I had quickly
and easily cut three or four foods, I looked at the group and said, “Now,
folks, many times those who attend these demonstrations watch me operate
this food machine and ask, ‘Mr. Ziglar, if I bought one of those machines,
could I do what you’re doing?’

“I’m going to be frank with you and say, emphatically not. There is no
way you’re ever going to be as good at running this machine as I am. Now
that’s not vanity, ladies, that’s just a fact. Let me explain. For several hours
every day all I do is turn this crank, and just look at what’s happening [I
was cutting food as I talked]. See how beautiful the food is and how easy
the machine is to operate? To be fair, ladies, I make it look easy because I
am a specialist with this machine.

The “Assumptive” Close Revisited
“Now ladies, when you get your machine [there’s my first assumptive
buying suggestion], by necessity you are going to be a ‘general
practitioner.’ While you are using your machine, you’re also going to have
to be looking after the children, answering the telephone, running the
vacuum cleaner, chasing the dog out of the house, and doing a hundred and
one other things. All I’ve got to do is turn the crank, so I should be pretty
good at it.”

Selling What the Product Does
They believed what I was saying, but at that point I had not sold a single
machine, which was the purpose of the demonstration, so I continued my
presentation. “If you won’t be as effective as I am with the machine, you
probably wonder just how good you will be at saving time and money plus
serving more attractive foods to your family. Here’s the answer.
“We could take this lady right here [and I’d always pick out a young lady
close to the front], give her five minutes to read the instructions, and with
the machine she will cut more food better and faster than any three other
ladies in the room if I gave them the three sharpest knives in town. Chances
are good they’ve been using knives all of their lives and our machine
operator has never used the machine. The reason she will cut more food
better and faster with the machine is simple. She has the machine that does
the work. While she won’t be able to use this machine as well as I do, she
will be able to do more than the three ladies with the knives because she has
the machine that does the job, and that’s what you really want—isn’t it,
ladies?” (Nodding heads.)

The “Trial” Close

That seemed to satisfy that objection pretty well. At this time I would cut
two or three other foods, remove the first blade from the machine, and use
my first trial close by saying, “Now, ladies, as you can plainly see, the
machine has five blades. I’ve used only one blade to cut these first six
foods, but let me ask you a question. If the machine had only this one blade
[and now I lowered my voice and looked them in the eye], how many of
you have already decided you sure would like to have your own food
machine? Can I see your hands, please?” Almost without exception several
of the ladies and even more of the men would nod their heads, hold up their
hands, or verbally indicate they wanted a machine.
I’ve always felt it was cruel and unusual punishment to require a prospect
to listen to the entire presentation after he told me he was ready to buy,
before I took his order and accepted his money. In my judgment, you should
be nice to folks and let them buy whenever they are ready, instead of
insisting they listen to the entire presentation before you permit them to
buy. (Note: In group selling you need an assistant to handle these impulse
buyers while you continue your demonstration.) Caution! Many times a
prospect in a group will respond as if he wants to buy when in reality he is
just being pleasant and agreeable. It’s difficult to tell the difference, so
experience and common sense are important.

Humor Can Be Invaluable
At this point I would cut two or three more foods and deal with the
second major unspoken objection by saying, “Many times I’ve had ladies
ask me, ‘Mr. Ziglar, if I bought that machine, could I cut my hand with it?’
” To this I would smilingly respond, “Yes, ma’am, you can, but we don’t
recommend it.”
(Many times you can do more with humor than you can by being dead
serious.) Then I would say, “Ladies, if you want to cut your hand with the
machine, it’s very simple. All you have to do as you turn the crank is to
insert your finger at the very back of the hopper so that it’s trapped between
the blade and the hopper itself. If you are coordinated, you insert your
finger as you turn the crank. This way the red comes out right over here
[pointing to the front of the hopper and obviously smiling broadly]!

“Now, ladies, if you don’t want to cut your hand, keep it out of the
machine! Any questions?” This approach apparently dealt with the handcutting objection beautifully because we seldom heard that particular
objection again.
As you know, I dealt with price at great length in the first segment, but
since it is an “objection,” I want to include one final word on the subject in
this section.

Too Much Money
Objection: “Costs too much.” Answer: “I’d be inclined to agree with that,
Mr. Prospect, because good things aren’t cheap and cheap things aren’t
good. Our company had a choice. We could either design the product to do
as little as possible so we could sell it as cheaply as possible, or we could
design and build it to do as much as possible so in the long run your cost
would be substantially lower.
“It is more than just a cliché, Mr. Prospect, to say you should invest in
the best in the beginning, or pay for the ‘get by’ in the end. So why
substitute the ‘get by’ for the best? When our company made the decision to
build the best product possible to do as many things as possible, we actually
placed ourselves in your shoes and tried to determine what would be best
for you. That’s the reason we unhesitatingly recommend this product so
highly.”
“The price is high.” “I don’t think there’s any question about the price
being high, Mr. Prospect, but when you add the benefits of quality, subtract
the disappointments of cheapness, multiply the pleasure of owning
something good, and divide the cost over a period of time, the arithmetic
comes out in your favor.”

“The price is high.” “Yes, it is, Mr. Prospect; however, in the final
analysis a product is worth what it can do for you, not what you have to pay
for it. If it costs you a hundred dollars but does you a thousand dollars’
worth of good, then by any yardstick you’ve bought a bargain, haven’t
you?”

Cost Is Not the Determining Factor
On December 16, 1982, pitcher Floyd Bannister signed a five-year, $4.5
million contract with the Chicago White Sox. He chose the White Sox over
the Atlanta Braves, who offered him a six-year contract worth $6.3 million.
That’s $1.8 million more than the White Sox offered and the Braves had
won their division pennant in 1982.
As a prospect, Floyd Bannister obviously considered some things more
important than money. Here’s what Floyd’s wife (in chapter 32 I elaborate
on why you should get both husband and wife involved in the decisionmaking process), Jana, had to say:
The Sox showed interest in Floyd as a person, not as a commodity. Until late in the
negotiations, they were not really in the running, but we kept an open mind. When it
came time to make a decision, it was important to us that [White Sox owner] Jerry
Reinsdorf and [White Sox pitching coach] Dave Duncan flew to Arizona and took us out
to dinner. It also was important that [White Sox manager] Tony LaRussa called Floyd
several times, and a couple of White Sox players, Carlton Fisk and Tom Paciorek, also
called.

Jerry Reinsdorf commented, “With Floyd we were dealing with somebody
entirely different than the average player. The city and his teammates were
just as important to him as money. I’d say fifty-fifty.”

Other factors in the decision were (1) a spacious home park more suitable
for Bannister’s fly-ball pitching, (2) an opportunity to remain in the
American League, and (3) a city where he had friends and relatives.
All those things were important, but I know Floyd Bannister well enough
to know his priorities. He puts God first, family second, and his baseball
career third. He weighed the offers of all the clubs and made his decision
based on his priorities. I insert Floyd’s story in Secrets of Closing the Sale
because it reinforces what the sales pro has learned throughout his career.
Find out what your prospect really wants and show him how your goods,
products, or services can better help him achieve his objectives, and you
will make the sale.
Price is important but it is only one of many important factors. If you
have a price advantage, you obviously utilize it to the maximum. If you
don’t have it, then do what the White Sox did in signing Floyd Bannister—
capitalize on your other advantages. Of course, as Sherlock Holmes would
say, “That’s elementary, my dear Watson.”

Maybe You’ve Got the Wrong Person
Caution: Many times when you’ve dealt with a series of objections and
the prospect continues to bring up other ones, you should understand that
maybe you’re talking to the wrong person. It could be that this man or
woman really is not the decision maker. He or she may have to confer with
someone else, like the purchasing agent, the president, or a mate. Your
prospect could be stalling and saving face by not admitting he can’t make
the decision.
To determine whether or not this is the case, this pleasant but direct
approach used by John Hammond is most effective. “Mr. Prospect, I don’t
want to sound presumptuous, but I honestly believe that because of the
versatility of our product and the nature of your need, our product is the
answer to any questions which you might raise. But before we go any
further, may I ask you a question?” If the prospect says yes, then say: “If I
can answer your question to your satisfaction that this is the right product at
the right time and at the right price, are you personally in a position to give
me an order for the product today, and would you be willing to do so?”

Chances are excellent if it’s handled properly and he cannot make the
decision, you will be able to determine this and save yourself a great deal of
time. If he acknowledges that he cannot make the decision, then you need to
make an appointment—with his help—with the person who can make the
decision.
Again, I emphasize if you are encountering the same objections
repeatedly, chances are excellent that your presentation is in trouble.

Objections Are Consistent
To repeat myself, the best time to deal with an objection is before it
occurs. As a general rule, most of the same objections are occurring after
each of your presentations. If this is the case, you need to make a recording
of your presentation (covered in chapter 5) so you can carefully analyze the
points you are covering and the manner in which you are covering them.
Chances are at least ten to one you will discover you are pretty “wordy” and
are missing some key points. You are probably elaborating too much on the
points which interest you but which might not be of particular interest to the
prospect.
It’s important you understand that you should already be sold and, hence,
you’re not trying to sell yourself again. You are trying to sell the prospect. It
makes sense to sit on the prospect’s side of the table, anticipate the
objections which historically you’ve been getting, then answer those
objections in your presentation.

25
Objections Are Consistent—
Objectors Aren’t
In no particular order I will first identify the different kinds of prospects and
then I will give some basic guidelines in one to five sentences as to how
you can deal with them.
First, there is the antagonistic prospect, then the skeptical, the gullible,
the egotistical, the know-it-all, the procrastinator, the hostile, the indecisive,
the dominant “tough guy,” the big spender, the conservative penny pincher,
the critical prospect, the bargain hunter, the good-time Charlie, and the
stone face. On the humorous side, you have the animal prospect who is
going to “bear” it in mind; the insomniac prospect who is going to “sleep on
it”; the musical prospect who will make a “note” of it; and the playful
prospect who is just “feeling out the market.”
Yes, there are many kinds of prospects and I will repeat part of this as I
deal with the various ones. There are two things you really need to know
about all of them.
Number one, according to sales trainer Thom Norman, they all want to
be right and they want to be understood. The second thing you need to
understand is that, as the late Charles Roth would say, at the point of
purchase all of them are afraid they’re going to make a mistake, particularly
if a significant amount of money is involved, and as a result, actually they
are “not quite normal.” It has been proven that at the point of decision a
purchaser’s heartbeat actually increases. Fear is there and fear affects
judgment, so I suppose in the truest sense of the word we could say they’re

not quite normal. Therefore, all prospects want reassurance that they are
making the right decision.
Convince the Prospect. Let’s also remember as we deal with the
prospects what Dan Bellus says: “The objective is not to defeat the prospect
but to convince him if he makes the purchase he’s going to be happier and
better off as a result.”
Another thing to remember is this basic formula that Cavett Robert
described: As objections are raised, regardless of the kind of prospect you
have, all the way from the gullible to the hostile, we first of all should act
delighted about the objection and assure the prospect this objection is not
going to be a problem when he has seen the remaining portion of the
presentation (objections thrive on opposition, but they die with agreement).
Second, we treat the objection as a question and then use that question as
the catalyst to get the prospect involved in the sales process. Third, we get
the commitment—this is the only question—and fourth, when possible, use
the objection as the reason he should buy and urge him to go ahead and do
exactly that.
Don’t misunderstand: No single formula or procedure can or will fit
every sales situation or objection you are going to encounter. However, this
basic formula or procedure, when completely mastered, will give you a
solid foundation which permits you to move easily into those situations
which are not tailor-made for the formula itself.
As we delve further into the objections, and as we have already done
with some in this book, I hope you notice we generally, but not always,
follow that basic formula. I urge you to keep this formula in mind, because
as we deal with the various objections, it would be redundant to keep
reminding you of it.

Prospects Want to Say Yes
I remind you that prospects do not want to say no, because no is final
and, as stated earlier, the prospect is just as eager to have his needs met as
you are to help him meet them. This is something most people are reluctant
to do. Remember that objections are not a reflection on you and you should
not take them personally. Keep your cool and your chances of making the
sale are greatly enhanced.

I also ask you to remember that you are not a lecturer when you are
dealing with the prospect. It’s not a question of you talking and the prospect
listening. The best way to make the sale is to get the prospect involved.
That’s why the question technique is used throughout this book. That’s the
technique used by good doctors and good lawyers as they probe and search
for the best ways they can identify the problem so they can come up with
solutions.

These Are Easy

Let’s start with the easy prospect first. “Gary Gullible” himself. Bless his
heart, he’s the one who gives all of us hope because he certainly brightens
our day when we encounter him. He’s the kind who still believes the moon
is made of green cheese. You deal with him in an open, straightforward
way. Tell him lots of human-interest stories. He’s more likely to buy
because he likes and trusts you than for any other reason. He responds to
persuasion but is offended with speed and pressure. Deal with him gently
but confidently.

The second prospect is “Sidney Skeptical,” who demands a bacteria
count on the milk of human kindness and is so cynical he thinks someone
pushed Humpty Dumpty. Not only is he skeptical, but in many cases he will
be argumentative as well. I especially remind you on this one that the
skeptical, antagonistic prospect wants to be right and he wants to be
understood. With this in mind, when he raises a dogmatic objection with a
little anger, cynicism, or sarcasm hidden underneath it, you should respond
by saying, “I’m delighted you raised that question, Mr. Prospect, and to
make absolutely certain I clearly understand what you’re saying, would you
mind repeating it?”

This does two things: It indicates an honest effort on your part to be fair,
and it also indicates you place considerable importance on what the
prospect is saying. Additionally, when he repeats his objection, chances are
good he will substantially reduce the tone of the objection.
In dealing with skeptical, antagonistic prospects, it’s important you not
try to argue or contradict what they’re saying, even if they are wrong. First,
let them finish saying what they have to say; get it off their chest; blow off
that steam. Once that is out of their system and they’ve seen that you are
interested and concerned about them, your chances of penetrating their
minds and closing the sale, as the late John M. Wilson would have said, are
increased substantially.
When the prospect brings up a dogmatic or strong statement in objection
form, you pleasantly say, “Your question pleases me, Mr. Prospect, because
it gets to the very heart of the matter, and since that is what I like to do, it
indicates we are on the same page.”

The third prospect (soon to be known as “Hostile Helen”) is cut from the
same bolt of cloth, but one important thing to remember is that she is
probably hostile for a reason. It could be because she’s been abused or
misled by a salesperson in the past. It could be something as simple as a
previous salesman’s not listening to her complaint.
One of the secrets is to get “Hostile Helen” talking. As she expresses her
anger you fall back on one of the oldest of the old (known to sales trainers
as the “Three-F principle”) as you say, “I know exactly how you feel.
Others in the past have felt the same way [pause]. They found when they
had all the facts there was some justification in the procedure which was
followed. They felt any mistake which might have been made was a
mistake of the head and not of the heart.
“Incidentally, Mrs. Prospect, one of the things that pleases me about what
you’re saying is this: I have found that most people who are as frank and
open [don’t you dare say “angry” or “hostile”] as you are turn out to be
more receptive. They are open and fair-minded when they have their

questions answered, so I’m pleased you bring your concerns forward in
such an open manner.”

He Can’t Decide—on Anything

Then there’s “Indecisive Ivan,” who wanted to start a procrastinators’
club but decided to wait until later. Ivan simply cannot make a decision.
He’s somewhat like the fellow who went to the psychiatrist and the
psychiatrist said to him, “I understand you have trouble making decisions.”
The fellow responded, “Well, yes—and no.” The indecisive prospect is the
kind of person who is in many ways the unhappiest of all people. He can’t
decide what to have for lunch, much less decide on a major purchase such
as a home, a car, a major investment, or a life insurance program. He takes a
pep pill to get charged up to do something, then mixes it with Valium so if
nothing happens it won’t bother him.
The way to deal with him is to win his confidence, which you do, as I’ve
repeatedly said, by being the right kind of person. Demonstrate
considerable empathy; move to his side of the table; let him know you’re on
his side; reassure him that, yes, he is making the right move. Your own
conviction and belief that your product is what he should buy will be the
determining factor. Remember, he’s having trouble deciding if he should
buy. If you have any doubts that you should sell, you can rest assured that
he won’t buy. Push him—be firm but not harsh.
Inner pressure is a key factor. You apply this by asking even more
questions than you normally would. Later in this segment of Secrets of
Closing the Sale, I will demonstrate in considerable detail exactly how you
ask questions and I will give you numerous examples. Incidentally, at this
point I have used over five hundred questions in this book. I’ll bet that
surprises you, doesn’t it? That was another question, wasn’t it?

Another type of prospect, identified by Jim Savage as “Betty Bargain
Hunter” and sometimes known as “Cautious Charlie,” always wants a little
better deal than anyone else. She considers every purchase a “contest.”
She’s got to feel she is the “winner,” and she won’t be happy unless she
gains some kind of concession. You can handle this one in two ways: First,
you say to her that one of the beautiful things about working with this
company is the fact that you treat everyone in the same manner. She can
buy your product with the complete assurance that no one—but no one—is
going to get a better offer from the company than she did and that her offer
makes her a winner. Generally speaking, that’s what she wants—the
assurance that she is the winner—that she is the smart one—that she got
your best offer.
Second, you can tie it down if there is something you as an individual can
do for her personally which not only guarantees no one got a better offer but
that she got the best offer because she got you. It can be a personal service:
“One thing I will do for you that I normally do not do is I will personally
take your order to shipping and see that it is handled—at no extra cost to
you—for immediate shipment today.” Or “I will personally walk your credit
through and save at least twenty-four hours for delivery.” Or “Since I am
going to be heading your way, I will personally be present when the
equipment is installed to make certain it is to your exact specifications.”

He’s Painful—Make Him Profitable

The next prospect is “Oliver Obnoxious,” the loudmouthed know-it-all.
Generally speaking, the obnoxious of the world are suffering from serious
self-image problems and feel the only recognition they can gain is of a
negative nature. Attention is what they crave, so give them attention but in a
firm and positive way. You also challenge that individual. Aside from all of
his bluster, in many cases underneath he is soft and mushy. He, too, wants
to be right—he wants to be understood—he wants to be appreciated.
You challenge him with statements like, “Our research indicates that only
3 percent of the population is in a financial position to purchase this

product.” Or “These payments are going to be large, Mr. Prospect; can you
handle one of . . .” Then quote the amount.
These obnoxious, know-it-all people also like to have their pride
appealed to. “This is a particularly nice suit,” or “an especially beautiful
landscape theme. It certainly fits in with your taste and with your character
because it puts you in an especially elite group.” This is real snob appeal,
which is important to them. Along these lines it is good to point out that the
local television personality or sports hero also has “this particular model.”
(Say this only if it is factual. As the late Bill Gove, one of the real pros in
sales training, used to say, “Never lie or ‘loop.’ ”)

The “I’m in a Hurry” Prospect

To this list add “Heloise Hurry-up,” the prospect who doesn’t want to be
bothered with the details. She wants the “facts, just the facts, I’ve got things
to do, I’m in a hurry!” Many times these people really are more interested
in saving time than they are in saving dollars. Be brief; be to the point; be
businesslike; close the sale as quickly as you can; assure her that you’ll
handle the details, you’ll take care of the delivery, you’ll personally see to it
she gets exactly what she wants; then make absolutely certain you follow
through.

Next comes “Jolly Jimmy,” the playful, good-natured prospect who in
many ways can be the most frustrating of all because on occasion he is
impulsive and indecisive. He is far more likely to buy from someone he
likes and enjoys being around. Make friends with him—laugh with him—
be casual. Then—as a friend—encourage him to go ahead and take action
now so he can enjoy the benefits now.

The Know-It-All Prospect

“Nora Know-It-All” is out to impress you, so let her. You’ve certainly got
nothing to lose. One word of caution: She might want to bend your ear all
day, so be aware of the time factor. You might let her impress you by paying
cash for the order and, in fact, a challenge to do so could be the key in
getting the order.

The same basic approach should be used with “Bobby Big Shot.” He
wants to feel important, so by all means, make him feel important. He
wants to be on center stage, so let the spotlight shine on him. By the same
token, he likes to know he is not dealing with “one of the boys,” but rather
someone who is qualified to handle his account. If you’ve set a few sales
records or if you have accomplished something significant, work it in in a
nonthreatening way so Mr. Big will know he’s dealing with someone who is
qualified to handle such an important person.

Just as we have the timid procrastinator who can’t make a decision, we
also frequently encounter “Impulsive Irene” who will say yes or no in pretty
short order. Once you’ve got her agreeing with you and you’ve headed her
toward a sale, go ahead and close with conviction and with firmness. Get
the order signed while she’s at the top of her impulse.

The Toughest of All
Sales trainer John Hammond identifies the toughest prospect as
“Agreeable Al,” the one who doesn’t object at all. He “yeses” you all
through the interview, smiles, nods, and agrees with everything. John
handles him in this way: When he instinctively feels, early in the interview,

this prospect is that kind and that he is not going to buy, John stops right in
the middle of a sentence, smiles, leans forward, and says, “Mr. Prospect, do
you mind if I ask you why you have decided not to accept this opportunity
to take advantage of the benefits our product offers?” Then he stops—
doesn’t say another word.

“Agreeable Al” will do one of two things. He will say, “It’s because . . .”
and then he will give you an objection which you can deal with, or he will
say, “What makes you think I’ve decided not to buy?” If that’s the case, you
just go ahead and write his order. Good strategy, John.

There Are All Kinds of Prospects
I suppose if we made an effort, we could list a hundred different kinds of
prospects: slow thinkers, fast thinkers, wrong thinkers, and non-thinkers;
big spenders, conservative penny pinchers, criticals, bargain 285 hunters,
timid, assertive, impulsive, needler, argumentative, nonlistener, stone face,
harassed executive, etc.
Then there are the old, the young, and the middle-aged; the male and the
female; the rich and the not-so-rich; and everything between. Regardless of
the prospect, everyone wants to be right, to be understood, to be
appreciated. All have physical, spiritual, and emotional needs. Our
objective is to meet those needs so these prospects will be our customers
instead of remaining under a label as prospects.
Of course, as Bill Gove would laughingly say, “The problem with
making a sale is you’ve just lost your best prospect.”
One thing to remember is many times when prospects bring up objections
in a dogmatic, antagonistic way, it is often a defense mechanism. Your
prospect, for example, might suggest that “all salesmen are a bunch of
crooks.” The point is that as a salesperson you shouldn’t take offense. One
or two unfortunate experiences might have led him to this conclusion.
Chances are excellent he wants to find a truly professional salesperson who
will convince him that he has reached an erroneous conclusion. He might

even want to buy something now. That means the chances are excellent he
wants somebody to sell him something, and since you’re there, it might as
well be you.

26
The Salesman’s Friend
In handling objections, one of the most important things to do is ask
questions. As I’ve stated on several different occasions, questions help you
to persuade the person to take action. Questions enable you to uncover the
prospect’s dominant buying motive, which you must do if you’re going to
be effective in selling.
Caution: Many times it is easy, when the customer vehemently brings up
a complaint, for you to be too ready to agree with the prospect and take
sides against your company. I urge you to proceed with extreme caution in
dealing with the complaint. Follow the techniques we’ve been talking
about. Act pleased that he has brought it up. Hear him out. Agree with him
that, yes, there is a problem. Find out if that is his only problem. Assure him
that you, the company, and in all probability the other salesperson want to
clear the air and solve the problem to everyone’s benefit. Then use that
complaint as the main reason he should do business with you and your
company.
After a strong complaint say, “Mr. Prospect, would you repeat exactly
what happened so I can be certain I understand the situation and we can
solve the problem?” You are acting as an arbitrator, as a go-between.
You’ve not denied the right of the prospect, and neither have you put your
company in an awkward position. That’s good because when all the facts
are known, the prospect could be (and often is) grossly overstating the case.
If that is so and you make promises which you cannot keep, you will look
foolish, the company will be further discredited, and the customer will be
even more “anticompany.”

With this procedure you diffuse much of his anger without going behind
the back of the other salesperson. This keeps his—and the company’s—
credibility intact.
The more violent the objection, the more critical it is that you follow this
procedure, because reasonable people generally are not overly belligerent or
vehement in their protests.

Objection or Question?
In dealing with objections, we need to make certain we’re dealing with
an objection and not a question. The way you tell the difference is simple. A
question is an inquiry seeking information. How much does it cost? How
long will it take me to get it? Do you have it in green as well as in yellow?
Do you have a more expensive or a less expensive model? Do you have a
bigger one or a smaller one? Those are questions which you answer.
Generally speaking, questions are a sign of interest and are asked in the
body of the presentation.
Under normal circumstances I’ve always believed in answering questions
when they are asked, provided they do not completely disrupt the sales
presentation itself. Example: If in the first part of the presentation the
prospect asks, “What does it cost?” you might or might not want to answer
it at that point, depending on whether your product is competitively priced
or whether you’re the top of the line. Experience, common sense, and
judgment should dictate your approach if you have a definite price
advantage.
If your product has definite quality and feature benefits but is not
competitively priced, if possible you should avoid answering the price
question until you have explained or demonstrated some of your benefits.

Here Are the Words
A direct answer to the prospect when he asks the price could be this:
Smile pleasantly and say, “I’m coming to that in just a moment.” Or “I’m
pleased you’re interested in the price. In a few minutes when I cover it
you’ll be glad you asked.” If the prospect persists, you might say, “I’d be
pleased to answer, Mr. Prospect, but it would be somewhat like having to
pay for a suit before you saw what you were getting. All I want to do is

make certain you see exactly what our benefits are so you can appreciate
what a bargain you will be getting.”
Yet another answer, provided this fits, could be, “There are so many
factors involved in price, such as size, model, terms, and delivery, I hesitate
to answer before we have narrowed down the choices I can offer you.”
When the prospect asks the price before you have had an opportunity to
establish value or explain benefit, you could also handle it this way: Look at
him, smile, and say, “That’s the part you’re going to be delighted with. I’m
pleased that you are already interested enough to inquire about the price. I’ll
get to it in just a moment.” Then I would move along into the presentation
itself.

Stay Tuned In to Your Prospect’s Timing
The speed with which you move is important. Don’t act like you’re on
the way to the races, but when you say you’ll get to the price in a moment,
quickly describe some attractive features and benefits that will justify the
price.
Let me emphasize that some prospects by nature are short on patience,
and if they demand an answer in another minute or two, you could take this
approach: “Mr. Prospect, I appreciate your concern, and please know that I
am not evading the issue. However, until we determine, as a result of our
discussion, what your needs are, it would be impossible for me to give you
a figure. My answer at this point might be too high or it might be too low. If
it’s too high, you might lose interest. If it’s too low, then when I give you
the true figure you would be disappointed.”
At that point you move back into the presentation. If, however, the
prospect again demands the price, I do not believe you can stall the issue
any longer, so meet it head-on by giving him the highest possible price,
including all the features, attachments, extras, or benefits which go with
your product or service. Do this by saying, “The highest possible price is,”
and then quote the figure. “However, chances are good the actual figure will
be less when we’ve determined your exact needs. I suspect your primary
concern is that the product meets your needs, isn’t it, Mr. Prospect?” Wait
for his answer, then move back into features and benefits.

If the prospect indicates the price was about what he had expected or
even less than he thought it would be, you ask the closing question. “Since
the product meets your needs and is easily within your price range, would
you like to have me install the equipment right away or do you have a
specific date in mind?”

You Don’t Have to Overcome All Objections
Throughout any interview or presentation you must remember that you
are not in the “objection-answering” business. You do not have to answer
all objections in order to make the sale. Realistically, seldom, if ever, will
there be a situation in which your prospect likes everything about your
product, goods, or services. Fortunately, your prospect doesn’t have to like
everything in order to buy your product. All the prospect has to do in order
to be a customer is to like what you sell more than he likes what he will
have to exchange for it.
Example: I bought a suit despite the fact there were two things I didn’t
like about it. First of all, I wasn’t too happy about the price, but with a little
help from my friend (and then clothier) Doyle Hoyer and the Redhead, I
was able to justify the price. (Everything is expensive, quality costs, longlasting, you need to look successful, etc.) Second, I didn’t like the fact that I
would have to wear a belt with the trousers, but that was minor.
Despite those two objections I bought the suit because I really liked the
color and the way the suit fit. Additionally, when I slipped my suit on, my
Redhead, who has got to be the world’s number one hugger, snuggled up
real close and said the suit felt good. ’Nuff said.
My major point is this: Often there will be objections you’ll be unable to
answer. There is even a slight chance the objection or question will have no
answer, so don’t worry too much about it. When the prospect does bring up
an objection, let me remind you that you are in the sales business and the
objection, when properly handled, is a friend which can help make the sale.

You Are Not in the Objection-Answering Business
Many times young salespeople (in sales experience, not birthdays) or
insecure salespeople acquire the mistaken idea they’re in the objectionanswering business. As a result of this misguided thinking, they actually

encourage or challenge the prospects to raise additional questions or
objections. This is especially true if the salesperson gives a sharp answer (in
his own opinion, of course) to a tough question or objection. As a sales
trainer, I have seen the salesman almost literally fold his arms and stick his
chin out, or by some other body language say to the prospect, “And I’ll
guarantee you I can handle the next one, too, so go ahead and shoot another
one at me; just try me!”
With this attitude the sale is often lost because the prospect invariably
gets the feeling the salesperson has an ego problem and is more interested
in parading sales knowledge than in solving his (the prospect’s) problem.

Rephrase and Soften the Objection
Many times an objection can be softened a great deal by rephrasing it.
For example, the prospect might say, “The quality of your product certainly
leaves a lot to be desired. I don’t believe it would last three weeks, much
less the three years your warranty covers!” Pretty strong— but it can be
largely neutralized or defused by rephrasing it. You do this by lowering
your voice, looking directly at your prospect, and saying, “If I understand
you correctly, you want to be certain the product has lasting quality and
you’re going to get dollar value for every dollar you invest. Is that your
question, Mr. Prospect?” Or you could shorten it and say, “So your question
is _____. Is that right?” (Never say, “To answer your objection . . .”)
Chances are excellent he will accept the rephrasing of his objection.
(Most people overstate objections, especially if at that moment they’re not
really interested. This often discourages the salesperson and causes him to
withdraw, which is what the prospect had hoped for.) From this softer,
friendlier base you’re in a much better position to move in a positive
direction toward the sale. This way you are using your selling skills as a
tool to persuade and not as a club to subdue. This works to the mutual
advantage of you and your prospect.

Be Gentle When You Go on the Offensive
The comment most frequently made by the prospect is, “I’m just not
interested.” Voice inflection and tone will determine whether this is a mild
objection, moderate objection, or strong objection.

If the objection is mild to moderate, you say, “I’m a little surprised to
hear you say you’re not interested, Mr. Prospect, because this would [state
your product’s major benefit]. However, I’m certain you have a good reason
for your lack of interest. Would you be willing to share that reason with
me?” Once again, the ball is back in his court.
Sales trainer John Hammond says that since he started using this
approach in 1957, only two prospects (he vividly remembers the details)
have refused to give him their reasons for not being interested. John says
this eliminates the guesswork as to why the prospect is not interested and
enables you to deal directly with the real objection.
If the prospect’s tone is harsh and dogmatic when he says, “Not
interested,” you should adopt the policy of the late Charlie Cullen and be a
little audacious. Repeat the words not interested in such a way you are
making a statement and asking a question. (There’s that voice inflection
again.) By handling it this way you effectively force your prospect to deal
with your statement, rather than having to be defensive yourself. It’s much
more effective.
When the prospect brings up any objection and you don’t really know
why he brings it up, instead of guessing, you should ask, as sales trainer Lee
DuBois suggests: “Obviously, Mr. Prospect, you have some good reason for
saying that [or “feeling this way”]. Do you mind if I ask what it is?” (Stop
—and wait for his answer.)
Think about It. Chances are excellent if you’ve been in the world of
selling for three days you’ve already dealt with a prospect who, after you
have made your presentation, states, “I want to think about it.” To put this
into perspective as well as to reveal something to you about human nature
and prepare you to close the sale, let me share with you a procedure I
follow when I present this information to a group.
I ask the group, “How many of you consider yourselves reasonably
honest?” (All hands go up.) Then I ask, “How many of you reasonably
honest salespeople have ever told another salesperson that you wanted to
‘think about it’?” (Again, all hands go up.) Then I ask, “How many of you
reasonably honest salespeople, after you told the salesperson you were
going to ‘think about it,’ honestly, legitimately, seriously, and carefully

thought about the offer which had been made to you?” At this point few, if
any, hands go up. Then I ask, “Were you ‘honest’ salespeople by any
chance trying to get rid of that salesman?”
The answer to that question could well be yes or no. Actually, sometimes
the prospect does want to terminate the interview or get rid of the
salesperson. The statement “I want to think about it” or “talk to my lawyer,
my banker, my partner, my mate, etc.” is a simple way to graciously end the
sales interview. However, there is another possibility.
Most people hate to use the word no because, as previously stated, it is so
final. When the prospect says no, that spells the end of that relationship, and
so, in an effort to avoid the use of the word no, they will often come up with
a number of made-up excuses. As salespeople, if we can understand this
basic fact, it puts us in a stronger sales position, because as long as the
prospect does not emphatically say no, the possibility of a sale still exists.
At this point it is important that as salespeople we must always remember
we also are consumers and we need to be able to think as a buyer as well as
a seller. Obviously, this is the empathy I talk about in chapter 8. With
empathy you are not part of the problem, but you understand the problem,
which you can help solve if you understand the thinking of the prospect.

Actually, He Won’t “Think It Over”
Don’t overlook this major point. Your prospect who wants to “think it
over,” in the vast majority of cases, will not actually do that, just as you
yourself probably will not seriously think it over by weighing and
evaluating all the pros and cons of the offer. In short, most prospects who
want to “think it over” don’t really do that, so in far too many cases they are
eventually going to say no.
Obviously, circumstances vary. Again, common sense and experience
should always be a factor, but as a guideline let me assure you that a no
today is better than a no tomorrow. Obviously, a yes tomorrow is better than
a no today, but I emphasize, when they don’t want to make a decision for no
apparent reason, in most cases they will say no tomorrow.
It’s better to have the no today than tomorrow for the simple reason it
clears your mind. You can now pursue new prospects and not count on that

one for a future sale. Once you count on a no prospect for a future sale, you
fall into the trap of not prospecting for new prospects, and the sale you miss
today will cost you sales tomorrow.

Handle It This Way
There are a couple of ways you can effectively handle the “think about
it” stall. First, you can smile and say, “That’s great! I’m delighted you want
to think about it, because obviously you would not waste your time thinking
about our offer if you were not interested. Therefore, I assume you want to
think about it to help reduce the chances of error whether your decision is
yes or no. Is that a valid assumption, Mr. Prospect? [Get an answer.] Would
you agree that the length of time you think about something is not the
important point? If I’m reading you right [I use this phrase a lot] and I think
I am, your prime objective is to be as certain as possible that you make the
right decision, regardless of whether you think about it two minutes or two
days. The right decision for you is what you’re seeking, isn’t it, Mr.
Prospect?
“Businesspeople and efficiency experts agree that the best time to make
accurate decisions is when you have the necessary facts which are
unclouded with other issues of the day. This way you can be more certain
your thought process is aimed at making the correct decision, based on
factual information which is fresh in your mind. Forgotten facts or confused
information will almost always lead to a faulty decision. With this in mind,
could we think together for a minute to make certain you arrive at the right
decision, which is what you want, isn’t it, Mr. Prospect?” (Wait for answer.)

The “Four Question” Close
“Actually, there are only four questions you need to answer in your own
mind and you’ve already voted yes on three of them. [Pause after each of
these questions.] Do you like it? Do you want it? Can you afford it? The
only remaining decision is: When do you want to start enjoying the
benefits? Obviously, you are the only one who can answer that question,
but, Mr. Prospect, may I ask you another question? [Pause.] The price will
remain constant or possibly increase. Since benefits and enjoyment can start
only when you acquire the product, your only decision boils down to when

you want to enjoy the benefits, doesn’t it, Mr. Prospect? [Pause.] With this
in mind, doesn’t it make sense to vote yes for now benefits?”
Executive Mark Gardner, who was with E. F. Hutton and Company, Inc.,
in Houston, Texas, when this book was originally released, was more direct
with this question: “Do you want to think about it because I may have
overlooked some salient point in my presentation?” or “What is it you
really want to think about?” “Would you elaborate on this?” (After the
answer, Mark continued.)
“Mr. Prospect, wouldn’t you say that in order to make an intelligent
decision you must have:
1. good access to the information;
2. expertise in order for you to evaluate;
3. perhaps a personal acquaintance with the management?
“Mr. Prospect, that is exactly what has been done here. What we are
discussing are important business decisions.
“Very often people like yourself might say, ‘Let me think about it,’ or
‘Let me call you back.’ What they are really saying is that they don’t like
the idea. Let’s speak frankly for a moment.
“Please—don’t just be polite. Is there something you feel uncomfortable
about? Something else you want to know?
“As a businessman it’s important for me to know . . .”
Here’s another approach. If your prospect has a sense of humor and says
he wants to think about it, you look at him, smile, and with an exaggerated
hand motion, thrust your arm out to expose your wristwatch and say, “Go!”
The late Dick Gardner, founder of the National Association of Sales
Education (NASE), taught me that one and it generally gets a good, solid
laugh. More importantly, it serves as a tension breaker and sales are made.
Use this technique with discretion, but it’s a safe bet that unless you are
selling a life-or-death product, any time you can make your prospect smile
or chuckle during the closing process you’re ahead of the game.
Here’s another, especially if you’re selling a lifetime product. “Mr.
Prospect, it’s just as inexpensive to have it all your life as it is to own it part
of your life. With that in mind, it will cost you a lot less per year, per

month, per day, to own it from now on instead of waiting five years or even
five months and then getting it. With that in mind, don’t you think you
ought to start enjoying the benefits now?”

Start Logically—End Emotionally
Remember that when you are dealing with a prospect who brings out
objections, you need to start with a logical answer but you close with an
emotional one. Our thinking brain is only 10 percent as large as our feeling
brain. People are moved to buy more from an emotional point of view than
they are from a logical point of view.
When objections are introduced and you handle them one by one in such
a way the prospect likes you and trusts you, you can generally tell when you
begin to make progress toward the sale. The prospect starts getting friendly,
goes back for another look, picks up the product one more time. Sometimes
he simply gets quiet and starts reading the agreement or some of the
promotional literature which you have placed in front of him.
Suppose the prospect brings up a question or objection which you cannot
answer. You respond this way: “That’s obviously an important question, Mr.
Prospect, or you wouldn’t have brought it up at this point in the interview. I
commend you on your insight, but since no one else has ever raised the
question, I don’t have the complete answer. Since it is important to you, and
quite frankly, to me as well, I’d rather personally get the information from
our support personnel at the home office to make certain it is completely
accurate. If that’s satisfactory, I’ll get back to you the first of the week.”
Incidentally, you never say, “Do you understand what I’m saying?”
Instead you ask, “Have I made myself clear?” or “Have I clarified this point
to your satisfaction?”

27
Using Objections to Close the Sale
How Many Do You Answer? Many times I am asked, “How many
objections should you answer before you attempt to close?” In my
judgment, two to three should be the maximum number, and in most cases
it will just be two (remember—there is a difference between questions and
objections). When your prospect raises either the second or third objection
(it will vary according to the circumstances), look your prospect in the eye
(your training in tone and voice inflection covered earlier will be invaluable
at this point) and say, “Mr. Prospect, let me ask you a question. Is this the
only thing which stands between you and ownership of ______, or is there
something else you need to consider?”
If the prospect says, “No, this is the only thing I’m concerned about,” at
that point you cover the objection and make a positive statement in question
form. “I believe that answers your question, doesn’t it?” If you get no
response or a positive response, you continue, “I’m delighted I was able to
answer your question, because I know you are going to love the product!”
You assume the close because the prospect had said only one objection
stood between him and ownership and you had secured agreement from him
that the barrier (question, objection) had been removed.

The “Talking Pad” Close
Many times a prospect has more than one question or objection, so he
could respond to the question in the last paragraph like this: “Well, no, in
addition to not being convinced the price is fair, I seriously question your
ability to service the account, and frankly, your guarantee leaves much to be
desired.” When your prospect has expressed these three objections, you

reach for your talking pad and write them down in abbreviated form as you
say, “If I understand you correctly, Mr. Prospect, your prime questions are,
number one, price.” (Write the word price.) “Number two, you are
concerned about our service.” (Write the word service.) “And number three,
you question our guarantee.” (Write the word guarantee.)

Now you have only three words on your talking pad: price, service, and
guarantee. Look your prospect in the eye and say, “In other words, Mr.
Prospect, if you could convince yourself the price is competitive, that we
have the ability to properly service the account, and our guarantee is more
than fair, you would be comfortable in making a yes decision concerning
our product. Is that what you’re saying?” Get a commitment.
If the prospect says yes, then you go to the price objection and deal with
it. I remind you that in chapters 5 and 24, I have dealt in great detail with
how to handle this objection, so at this point you utilize that information.
When you complete the handling of the price objection, you look at the
prospect and make the statement in the form of a question: “Surely, Mr.
Prospect, this satisfies you on the price, doesn’t it? If it does, Mr. Prospect,
then with your permission I would like to remove “price” as one of the
questions. Is that all right?” (Nod your head as you cross out the word
price.) Incidentally, “Is that fair enough?” “Does that make sense?” and “Is
that all right?” are three of the strongest trial closing questions.

Remove the Barriers One by One
Next you deal with the service question or objection. At this point there
is nothing more convincing than letters from satisfied customers who have
specifically dealt with the service aspect of your business. (These are the
testimonials Mike Frank told us about in chapter 14.) Since this is a
question of company stability and integrity, your membership in the

Chamber of Commerce and the Better Business Bureau, as well as
references to the size, age, and integrity of your company, is important. As
you get the verbal and body-language feedback from your prospect, you
conclude the service presentation by asking, “Does this answer your
question as it relates to our service reputation?” If it does, then ask, “May I
then remove the question concerning our service capability?” As you ask
the question, you assume a positive answer and literally cross it out with
your felt-tip or ballpoint pen.
“The third question, Mr. Prospect, had to do with the guarantee which we
offer. Let me start by saying that any guarantee is only as good as the
company which offers that guarantee. As I have already demonstrated, we
do represent a viable, solid business establishment. One thing I emphasize,
Mr. Prospect, is that unless the guarantee is fair to both buyer and seller, it
has no value. If we, as a company, couldn’t live with it, we would be out of
business. Then, regardless of how extensive the guarantee might be, it
would have no value. Our guarantee protects you from virtually everything
but human error and carelessness, as well as abuse of the product. Our
product, as I have demonstrated, is built for use but not abuse. We protect
you from all manufacturing defects as well as normal use. I believe, Mr.
Prospect, that’s your major concern, isn’t it?”

Parade Your Strengths
Because each company has its own strong points, I urge you to learn
what yours are and handle them accordingly. The prime consideration in
dealing with objections like this is not to become defensive or in any sense
of the word attack your prospect or raise your voice. “Mr. Cool” is the
phrase here. Calm, quiet assurance is what the prospect is seeking. To
repeat myself, it is at this point in the negotiation that your qualities as a
person are just as important as your sales skills. If you’re the right kind of
person and have acquired the professional skills, you should lose very few
sales because of objections.
After you have covered those objections, including that third one, look
the prospect in the eye and say, “I believe, Mr. Prospect, in your own mind
you feel pretty good about our guarantee, don’t you?” Again, you assume
the positive answer and, with a big smile, cross out the final objection.

At this juncture, you will have utilized the information provided for you
by your own company trainer and your company literature. One more time,
Secrets of Closing the Sale was written primarily to reinforce your company
efforts, not to replace them.
When you have covered all three of the objections, you look at the
prospect and say, “You know, Mr. Prospect, I wish everyone I deal with was
as concise with their questions as you are, because if a person knows his
own feelings, it makes it easier and more fun to demonstrate our products. I
know that you are going to love this product!” With a big smile you extend
your hand as you assume the sale.
Caution: Don’t “overanswer” any one objection. First, it could indicate,
in the mind of the prospect, you are defensive to the point you are uncertain
about your product. Even worse, you could so overwhelm the objection that
your prospect could be made to feel like an idiot for mentioning it. As we’d
say down home, “That ain’t the way to sell ’em!”

The “Safety Valve” or “Punt and Pray” Close
In handling objections, I personally believe we all need to have what
Dick Gardner called “safety valves.” Hal Krause calls this the “Punt and
Pray” approach. All experienced salespeople have been asked questions or
have been confronted with objections which they know how to handle but,
unfortunately, can’t recall at the moment of need. When this happens you
can’t just clam up for a couple of minutes. Nor is it advisable to say, “I
know the answer but can’t think of it, so give me a minute or two and I’ll
give you the answer.” Since you know the answer (assuming you do), you
should develop some “safety valves” or “punt and pray” fillers.
Here’s the way they work. The prospect asks the question or raises the
objection for which you have an answer but cannot immediately recall, so
you “punt and pray” by saying, “I’m delighted you raised this question,
because in my mind it is quite important. I commend you for having the
interest and insight to explore this facet of our offer. [Obviously, if you
can’t sincerely say this, then the “pray” part of “punt and pray” needs to be
literal.] This interest and insight will enable you to more completely utilize
the services which we offer so you’ll get the maximum benefit.” By this

time you should have recalled the specific answer to the objection, so go
ahead and answer it.
The same approach can be taken when you have the answer ready for use
but you want to phrase it in the best possible way. For example, a doctor
might need to think through the gentlest manner in which to deliver
distressing medical news. A loving parent or mate will want to soften
distressing or upsetting news, so voice tone, words, and manner play an
important part. You know the answer, but delivering that answer is the
tough part.

Play It Cool—Use a Safety Valve
Occasionally a prospect will make a dogmatic statement which
necessitates a built-in safety valve. For example, your prospect might say,
“I wouldn’t do business with that outfit you represent in a hundred years!”
He’s dogmatic, even a little vehement in his statement. Your “safety valve”
procedure is simple and effective. Lower your voice, look him in the eye,
and say, “Mr. Prospect, it’s obvious you feel quite strongly about this issue,
so you must have an excellent reason for feeling as you do. Would you
mind sharing with me why you feel this way?”
Very soft, very quiet, but when you follow this procedure you will
remove much of the vehemence and emotion from the scene. Interestingly
enough, in most cases you will discover the problem involves a personality
conflict, a communications gap, or some insignificant detail. However,
regardless of its actual size, if it’s big in the eyes of the prospect—it’s big.
Regardless of its size or significance, this procedure brings the objection
into the open so that you can deal with it. The key to this approach is not to
take it personally when the prospect attacks your company, its procedures
and policies, or a past incident. Remember, if you lose your cool, you lose
the sale.

The “Alternate of Choice” Close Revisited
Much of this has been dealing primarily with the direct or in-house
salesperson who has more time and who works under different
circumstances from the salesperson who is in a regular retail outlet; hence,
the answers and procedures are different. There also is the factor that

virtually all direct sales, whether in cosmetics, cookware, life insurance,
vacuum cleaners, encyclopedias, some types of commercial printing, Girl
Scout cookies, raffle tickets, etc., are generally sold on a one-call basis.
If the prospect is in a retail store, after you have answered the objections
you handle the final part in a slightly different way. You assume the close
but you do so with an alternate of choice by saying—always pleasantly
—“I’m delighted I was able to answer that particular question, because it’s
our function here at ____________ Company to give our customers the best
possible service. I know you will enjoy this product a great deal, and of
course, we’re here to service it should there be any need. Now let me ask
you, would you like to take the product with you or would you prefer that
we deliver it to your door [assuming it’s a product the customer could take
with him or merchandise that you deliver]?”
Other alternates of choice on the close: “You seem to be leaning toward
the red, or do you prefer it in blue?” Yet another: “Did you want us to use
your charge card or were you going to handle it by check or cash?”

The “Wheeler Which” Close
The “Alternate of Choice” Close was originally identified during the
1930s by sales trainer Elmer Wheeler, who called it the “Wheeler Which.”
He was commissioned by the Walgreen Drug chain to help their business.
In those days all drugstores had soda fountains which contributed
considerably to the profit structure as well as to the flow of traffic in the
store.
Malted milks, which sold for fifteen cents, were an extremely popular
item in those depression years. One of the things they added to malted
milks was eggs. The price of each egg was an extra nickel, and since
Walgreen’s bought them for fifteen cents a dozen, the more eggs they sold
in malted milks, the greater their profit.
When a customer ordered a malted milk, Elmer taught the clerks to hold
up two eggs, smile, and ask, “One egg or two?” In the vast majority of
cases, though they had not planned to order even one egg, the customers
would take the easy way out and say, “One.”

Walgreen’s discovered that as many customers said “two” as said “none.”
The number of eggs they sold ran into hundreds of crates each week. The
impact on their profit structure was dramatic.
Sometimes the Alternate of Choice involves a very simple decision
which will carry a major decision. Example: In the sale of a home the real
estate person can say, “One of the things I like to provide for my customers
is a beautiful door knocker with your name inscribed on it. Tell me, Mr.
Prospect, would you want it in Olde English, Modern American, or
Corinthian Script?” Automobile salesmen, especially those who sell the
luxury cars, can and should offer personalized monograms for the
dashboard or door, using the same basic approach.
Obviously, no one buys a home or luxury automobile to get a door
knocker or monogram, and no close will really work if the customer does
not want to buy. What this close, as well as the other closes, does for those
people who want to buy and plan to buy is simple. It gives them an
additional nudge in the form of a reason or excuse to go ahead and take the
action now. In short, a good close is designed to get a decision and get the
decision in your favor. Really good closing makes every customer feel that
he’s buying, you’re not selling. That feeling is what helps make him a
permanent customer.
The “Alternate of Choice” Close is used hundreds of times every year by
all of us. Again, regardless of what your job or profession might be, you sell
every day.
Parent to child: “Do you want to cut the grass or wash the windows?”
Teacher to student: “Do you want to settle for a B or would you prefer to
complete the assignment?”
Physician to patient: “Would you like to live longer or keep smoking?”
Attendant to car owner: “Would you like for me to rotate the tires and
give you an extra five thousand miles or leave them as they are?”
Suitor to date: “Shall I pick you up at half-past seven or would eight
o’clock be better?”
Waiter to diner: “Would you like soup or salad with your dinner?”

Patrolman to speeder: “Would you like to pay the speeding ticket now or
do you prefer to go to court on the first of August?”
Point: Since all of us sell every day, doesn’t it make sense to learn how to
do it more effectively?

Specific Objections
One question frequently asked in my personal visits with salespeople
around the country and during seminars when I’m having an open
discussion on objections is this one: How do you deal with a prospect who
is currently buying from an old and trusted supplier who offers virtually the
same product at roughly the same price, gives approximately the same
service, and has the added advantage of being a friend or relative with many
years’ experience in satisfactorily handling the account?
This is a tough one, and what I’m going to say will not answer all of the
objections, nor will it get the sale every time. But I am convinced it will
enable you to make some of the sales and will always give you the feeling
you are at least in the ballpark of possibility. In short, hope is there.
When the prospect says basically the things I’ve mentioned above, the
worst thing you can do is attack the credibility of the supplier or the quality
of his product. That guarantees you will never make the sale, nor will you
have much of a chance with a frontal assault. However, I believe the
possibility for a sale is good with this next approach. It’s the method
discussed in two or three different sections of the book, and it involves
asking a lot of questions.

The “Obligation” Close
You might convince a person with a frontal assault that you have some
advantages, but the only way you are going to get his business is to
persuade him. As previously mentioned, you persuade only by asking
questions, so the prospect literally leads himself into a yes decision.
In this particular instance you handle it this way: “Mr. Prospect, if there
were a way for you to buy the same product from your current supplier at a
better price and get better service in the process, you would be interested in
knowing how to do that, wouldn’t you?” Wait for an answer, which
undoubtedly will be, “Yes, how could I do that?” You: “Before I answer,

Mr. Prospect, two more questions, please. Number one, at this precise
moment do you feel any obligation whatever to buy anything from me, a
complete stranger whom you’ve never seen before?” (Wait for answer. It’s
going to be no.)
“Second question, Mr. Prospect. Do you feel any obligation or inclination
to continue buying from your current supplier, who is a close friend and
with whom you’ve been dealing for umpteen years?” (Wait for answer. It’s
going to be yes or some.) “Basically, Mr. Prospect, it goes without saying
that your first loyalty is to yourself and your family and not necessarily
what is best for any supplier. Would you agree with this premise, Mr.
Prospect?” (If you can get him to agree with this, you’ve taken one small
step toward the sale. If you can’t, then obviously you’re not dealing with
someone who has an open mind.)

I’ll “Try Harder”
When you get the answer you respond: “Then, Mr. Prospect, since you
are not obligated to me but feel obligated to him, does it make sense that I
would be willing to work harder, give you better service, and take care of
the account in a more anxious-to-please manner? Doesn’t it make sense that
I would keep you at the top of my list of priorities so that I can earn your
business in the only way open to me, which is giving you a good product at
a good price with even better service?” (This kind of logic has got to hit a
hot button somewhere.)
“Without being presumptuous, Mr. Prospect, would I be wrong to assume
you have considerable interest in the bottom line? [Get answer.] Then if you
could get a better price, better quality, and/or better service, any one of
those three things would have a direct bearing on your satisfaction and your
profitability, wouldn’t it? Now, Mr. Prospect, two of them would have a big
bearing and three of those factors could make quite a difference in the
bottom line.
“With this in mind, Mr. Prospect, and since you’ve already recognized
your first loyalty is to yourself, don’t you feel it would be in your best
interests to at least give me a chance to prove I can and will give you more
for your money? This way I have to earn the business, which automatically
makes you a winner.

“Please understand, I’m not asking for all of your business. I am simply
encouraging you to give me a chance to earn part of your business. You do
have a lot to gain and nothing to lose.
“When you receive the shipment, you should display it in a prominent
spot so your current supplier will be absolutely certain to see it. When he
does, one of two things will happen: (1) He will determine in his own mind
that he’s got to do a better job or give you a better price in order to keep
your business, or (2) you will discover we really can give you better service
and/or a better price.
“Could we start you with one gross or would you go for three and the
larger discount which goes with it?”

That’s What Bill Said
Many years ago Bill Gove, one of my early mentors, covered a simple
and effective way to handle this “I’m buying from a friend or relative”
objection. However, it wasn’t until John Hammond offered it as a
suggestion for this book that the real impact hit me. Here it is:
“Mr. Prospect, I understand what you are saying and I can appreciate
your interest in maintaining that relationship. I’m not suggesting you take
business from him and give to me. However, from time to time I have ideas
which I believe will increase your business, which increases the need for
my products. If I share those ideas with you, which I’m willing to do, would
you be willing to give me the extra business which my ideas generate? This
way everyone wins. You continue to do business with your friend and your
business increases so you and your friend both win. The increase in your
business means you must buy more of the product I sell, and so I would
benefit because of your increase. Does that sound like a good idea and a fair
exchange, Mr. Prospect?”

The “Similar Product” Close
Occasionally a prospect will say, “Your product is just like . . .” and then
name another product. When this happens, you don’t disagree completely or
categorically state that your product is totally different. Instead you find an
area of agreement, which is easy to do. You calmly look at your prospect
and say, “Yes, I agree with you there are some similarities, which I believe

is what you are saying, isn’t it, Mr. Prospect? [Get answer.] Along these
lines, let me state that the visible difference between an original Rembrandt
and a reproduction or imitation is small. However, if you put the imitation
and the original up for sale, there would be a substantial difference in price,
wouldn’t there? With this in mind, Mr. Prospect, let me show you the little
differences which make ours the “Rembrandt” of the field as far as
performance and quality are concerned. You do want the best product at the
best price, don’t you, Mr. Prospect?”
If your prospect has a good sense of humor and he states that “your
product or service is just like . . . ,” if you’re a salesman, you go back to the
“similar” approach and say, “Yes, they are similar, but I might also point out
that my wife and I are very similar. Each of us has two arms, two legs, and
a head, but there are some intriguing differences. To tell you the truth, it’s
the differences which got us together and it’s the differences which are
keeping us together!
“It’s true there are similarities in our products, but it’s the differences
which make our product the best buy for you.” Now identify the
differences, spell out why those differences make your product the best buy,
and close by saying, “You do want the best for your money, don’t you, Mr.
Prospect?”
There are many objections and even more answers, but in the final
analysis it boils down to this: If you are the right person selling the right
product at the right price and you are convinced the customer is the big
winner, then you are in the driver’s seat. Now to this add the
professionalism of knowing and using the right words with the right voice
inflection, the right intent, and the right follow-up, and you will increase
your closing percentage.

The “Right Experience” Close
Getting a job obviously involves “selling.” This example of handling a
major objection is primarily aimed at the teenager entering the job market,
but with some variations much of it is applicable to any job applicant.
Since I have emphasized from the opening chapter that the salesperson is
the most important part of the sales process, I am going to start with the
basic assumption the applicant has been taught the importance of honesty,

character, integrity, faith, love, and loyalty. He has also been taught to
accept responsibility, to be dependable, and to have a good attitude.

Objection: “What Is Your Experience?”
The typical teenager has had no sales training, so when he is asked,
“What is your experience?” he is likely to reply: “I don’t really have any
regular job experience. I’ve done some baby-sitting and looked after the
neighbors’ pets while they were on vacation, but this will be my first job.”
A young person may think that is the only answer he can give to such an
objection. And as long as he thinks that and replies in that way, he will find
it very difficult to secure a job because he hasn’t answered the primary
objection of this would-be employer.
But the truth is, he does not have to reply as above. If he has received
some sales training or attended the I CAN or Coaching to Change Lives
many classes we offer in many public and private schools in America, he
can say:
“Thank you for asking me about my experience. I realize that’s important
to you. You want to know if I’m really the kind of person who can do the
job so that your customers get the best possible product and service. Do I
understand you correctly? [Wait for an answer.]
“Sir, I’ve had a lifetime of experience which will help me be a better
employee. For example, I’ve learned the importance of being dependable
and telling the truth in everything I do. In addition, I’ve learned the
importance of getting along with other people, and I know by experience
that everybody does his work better when he’s getting along with others.
“I also know that certain things will be expected of me if you hire me. I
expect to do the work you give me to do, with a positive attitude and in a
responsible manner. I know also that if I want a raise I must be willing to
come in early, work a little harder, and stay late if necessary.
“Another thing I understand is that businesses have to make a profit in
order to stay in business and pay their employees. It’s clear to me that if the
employees do a good job, chances are excellent the company will make a
profit. In order to keep my job, and get ahead in my job, I am ready to work

hard and do my very best. I believe your business and every business needs
that kind of experience.”

You Told Your Story—Now Close the Sale
Once he has said that—and it only takes a minute or two—this
“experienced” teenager can go for the close. I suggest a statement and a
question:
“Sir, I need a job and I’ll make you a promise. I’ll work hard for you and
you will never regret having hired me. In fact, you will be proud that you
were the one who gave me my first job and training. I’m ready to go to
work immediately or whenever it best suits your needs. When do you want
me to start? Right away, or would the first of the week be better?” (Say no
more. The ball is in his court.)
This “sales talk” won’t guarantee a job, because that company might not
have an opening, but if you give that presentation enough times, I’m
confident you’ll get a job fairly soon.
Obviously, I don’t expect a teenager (scared to death) on his first job
interview to calmly give that sales talk, but I do believe this: If you, as a
teenage job applicant, will convey that information, I don’t believe there’s
an employer in the country who would not be impressed. He might not hire
you, but if you work hard enough to learn that presentation, I believe he
will do everything he can to send you to an employer who will give you a
job.
I also believe if you are temporarily unemployed and there are no
openings in your specialty or your field, you can use this basic approach to
get a job in other fields. You do have the kind of “experience,” and lots of
it, that thousands of employers need. They will buy you and your
experience if you sell yourself to them.
Like all other sales jobs this one might require that you make a lot of
calls, but this approach will put your name at the top of a number of lists for
the next job opening. If you will learn this basic approach (remember, I’m
assuming you have the characteristics you claim in the presentation), you
will be considerably more relaxed and confident going into the interview,

which means you will be able to show your product (you) at your best. This
fact will dramatically increase your chances of getting the job.

28
Reasons and Excuses for Buying
Sell on the Tangible—Close on the Intangible
In overcoming objections it is often necessary to offer the tangible as the
reason for buying but emphasize the intangible as the excuse for buying.
For example, you might be selling a beautiful lot on a lake, an outstanding
retirement home, or even one of the vacation packages known as “time
share.” Each one of them definitely offers something tangible which
prospective buyers can put their hands on or “sink their teeth into.”
However, if the lot on the lake or golf course is typical, it will sell for
many thousands of dollars. From a purely logical point of view, to spend
that many dollars on a parcel of land which is restricted (to put it kindly) is
not really the logical thing to do. The lot is tangible, so there’s the reason
for buying, but if you’re going to get the sale, you need to switch it to the
intangible so they also have an excuse for buying.
Example: “In addition to your own beautiful lot, Mr. Prospect, you’re
getting this marvelous spring-fed lake, which is well stocked with bass and
bream. You have the full-time use of the golf course, as well as the peaceful
nature trails to either walk or cycle on as your wishes dictate. Perhaps best
of all is the fact that you have the quiet serenity of being in an area with
people who also desire the quietness of a semi-isolated area such as this.
The restfulness and activity at your pace, away from the heat, smog, noise,
congestion, and confusion which you encounter in the city, will add joy,
peace, and relaxing fun to your life.”

The “Deserve It” Close

You have now taken it from the tangible and moved it into the intangible.
More appropriately you have taken a tangible base, the property itself, and
given the prospect what he really wants in the package. You’ve given him a
reason for buying (beautiful lake lot—real property) and an excuse for
buying (gracious living, less stress, etc.).
You close the sale by saying, “All of your life, Mr. Prospect, you have
worked and put much into the world and into the future. Don’t you think
you now deserve to start enjoying some of the fruits of all those years of
labor and effort? You owe it to yourself to do this.
“If I’m reading your wife correctly, she is giving her permission; I’m
certainly giving my permission; all that’s necessary is for you to give
yourself permission to enjoy what you’ve worked for all of your life. What
about it, Mr. Prospect? You do like the property and you do enjoy both
golfing and fishing, don’t you? Can you really think of any reason you
should deny yourself the realization of this dream that you’ve worked for
all of your life?”

Remember—He’s Scared
As you talk with your prospect, whether he’s buying the lot on the lake,
the retirement home, the time share, or anything else, you need to remember
four basic things: First, he needs the reassurance that it’s all right for him to
take this step, that what he’s buying is fairly priced, that you represent a
legitimate organization, and that your integrity is solid.
The second thing you need to remember is that every prospect, almost
regardless of what he’s buying in an area which could be defined as
nonessential or even luxury, has the haunting fear that he’s paying an
inflated price and what he’s getting is not worth the asking price. You can
partially put his fears to rest by having solid evidence of comparative
pricing, but ultimately his fears will be put to rest primarily because of his
confidence in you as a person. You are the bridge over which the prospect
must cross if he is to move from fearful prospect to confident buyer.
Number three, you must remember that your prospect’s sense of fairness
is involved (you are the expert—he is the “innocent lamb”). Perhaps he has
been taken advantage of in the past and he certainly does not want it to
happen again. Sometimes fear or an unpleasant experience will cause your

prospect to act in an unreasonable or antagonistic manner. This is why you,
the salesperson, must keep your cool, be completely ethical, and totally
believe what you’re selling has real value and is fairly priced.
Number four, you must remember your prospect is not only buying for
himself but also is buying with other people in mind. He’s concerned about
what others will think. This is true regardless of the image he attempts to
project. He’s concerned about what his family, his friends, his fellow
employees, and his neighbors think.
That’s one of the reasons little phrases like, “You will be the envy of the
neighborhood,” “Your family will be proud of you for making this move,”
and “Your fellow workers will be delighted to see you’re finally going to
give yourself a treat,” are so effective. Just remember that there will be
some who will kid him about the purchase and you need to arm him with
things to say to them or you might end up with a cancellation.

Remember—Prospect Buys Future Enjoyment
To tie these things down, just remember the prospect does not buy what it
is, he buys the future enjoyment of what you’re selling, regardless of the
product. Remember also that he doesn’t buy the house on the lot, he buys
the shade of the trees in the yard, the warmth of the fireplace in the cold
winter months, the convenience of the telephone in the bathroom. He buys
the coolness of the evening on the lake, the exhilaration of the downhill
skiing experience with his family, the joy of his motorboat on the lake, the
luxury of the dip in the heated pool. Again, all of these are the intangibles
made possible by the tangible property which he’s buying. Now do this: Go
back two pages and underline and become especially aware of the warm
selling words and word pictures I have used.
Note: At this point you should put Secrets aside, pick up your notepad
(discussed on page 13), and write down the reasons and the excuses you
can give the prospect for investing in your goods, products, or services.

Give Prospect an Excuse and a Reason
If you give a prospect a reason for buying, he might buy. If you give him
an excuse to buy, he might buy. But if you give him a reason and an excuse

for buying and then make it easy for him to buy, your chances for a sale are
dramatically increased, as the folks at A. O. Smith Harvestore will tell you.

A Team of Professionals
The morning before I spoke at one of A. O. Smith Harvestore’s national
conventions, I had the privilege of spending several hours with one of the
real professionals in the world of selling, Carl K. Clayton. I had previously
spent time with him in our Born to Win seminar, but that morning I learned
a new side of Carl as he shared all the exciting information about their
Harvestore structure and what it did for the farmer. It actually is a system
which farmers use as a storage unit but which has some decided advantages
over the old-fashioned silo. This unit enables the farmer to store the grain
before it is completely dried.
The farmer gathers the grain from the field when the moisture content is
25 to 30 percent. He loads the structure with grain from the top of the
Harvestore unit. The unit has a pair of “lungs” at the top. This simply
means that during expansion and contraction all the air is out of the unit and
the farmer is able to dramatically reduce spoilage. With the moisture in the
grain, the livestock will eat less grain, which they are able to digest more
completely. This saves from 10 to 15 percent on the grain while increasing
the meat productivity 10 to 15 percent. It truly is a remarkable concept
which is a big dollar saver for the farmer.

The “Reason-Excuse” Close
Another tremendous benefit to the farmer is the fact that by using this
system he does not have to bale his hay. He simply gathers it and puts it into
this Harvestore system (I mention only one of their products). The farmer
knows that having to bale hay has run more young men off the farm than
any other single reason.
In the presentation to the farmer, the Harvestore salesman can give him
some exciting data. Number one, on the average the unit will pay for itself
in reduced losses and increased productivity in seven years or less. Number
two, the farmer has to work considerably less with the Harvestore system
than with other systems whereby the farmer has to bale the hay or gather

the grain after it has dried out or have it artificially dried, which is
expensive and causes shrinkage.
To sum it up, they’re able to sell the unit because the reason they give the
farmer (which he gives to his banker for the necessary financing) is that the
unit literally is cost-effective and will save all that money. The reason the
farmer uses is the financial one.
Carl told me the real excuse most farmers buy is they’ve talked to
Harvestore customers who testify that the work saved gives them more free
time and they can even take vacations. Best of all, the children they are
raising will be far more likely to stay on the farm because it makes for a
much easier and more modern operation.
As I say, give a person a reason for buying and he might buy. Give him
an excuse for buying and he might buy. Give him a reason and an excuse
for buying, then make it easy for him to buy, and chances are substantially
increased he will buy.

The Toughies Are the Teachers
Over the years, I suppose I have spent as much time on a sales call as
most salespeople. It’s not that I’m stubborn or hardheaded, though I confess
to a degree of that, nor is it entirely due to the fact I’m that persistent,
though I’m guilty of that, too. It’s not because I’m so competitive that I just
hate to miss a sale, though the Redhead would disagree with that particular
statement.
There is at least one other reason I have stayed on some calls as long as I
have, and that simply is because the tougher the prospect, the better the
teacher. The more objections they give me which I overcome, the better
able I am to handle the next sales interview. The more roadblocks that are
placed in front of me, the sharper I hone my skills. I feel this “firing line”
training has enabled me to uncover some great sales truths which I now
share with you. I needed lots of “teaching from the toughies” in order to be
able to write this book.
You, too, need lots of teaching from the toughies if you are to grow and
mature into the kind of salesperson you are capable of being. Howard
Bonnell points out that often a prospect will start with an adamant “I won’t

even consider it” rejection. However, his next objection is weaker and
subsequent objections grow progressively weaker.
When the salesman senses the prospect’s will is weakening, he is
encouraged and his own resolve grows stronger. I want to say again that I’m
not talking about “winning” a contest and imposing the salesman’s will or
merchandise upon the prospect. I established in the beginning that the
professional really believes he renders a service and does the prospect a
favor when he sells. In my own case I can emphatically state that the major
reason I made every legitimate effort to sell anybody anything was because
I sincerely felt I was morally obligated to sell the prospect a product which
was good for him.
There is one specific point, however, when I throw in the towel and
withdraw my efforts to close. That point is when the prospect makes it clear
—after seeing the benefits—that he has no interest and cannot or will not
buy. Until that point, however, I am going to make an honest effort to close
the sale. As I’ve already indicated, I do this with pleasant persuasiveness,
which I will deal with again later on in the book.
As you move into the additional closes which I share with you, do so in a
natural manner. The close is part of the process, just as the hands and arms
are a part of you. You should move into the close smoothly, naturally, and
above all else, without any hesitation. You do this as you attempt to impart
a sense of urgency for “action now” on the part of the prospect.
Incidentally, urgency is part of all professionals’ repertoire.
The doctor might well say that your gallbladder is not in the best of
shape, “but there’s no real emergency—yet.” What you have to decide is
when you want to have it removed. Will it be at your convenience and
according to your schedule, or according to when it ruptures and creates
considerable pain and require immediate surgery?
The mechanic imparts urgency when he says the brake drums are not
ruined—yet. What you need to decide is whether to spend a few dollars
now while your car is already in the shop, or to delay and take the chance of
ruining the brake drums and endangering your life. Yes, urgency is a part of
the vocabulary of all professionals.

I will continue to remind you that your customers will buy from you
because of anticipated future enjoyment or satisfaction. The customer who
says yes certainly won’t destroy your career, and the one who says no won’t
destroy your career. However, there are two things which can destroy your
career: The first is the people you do not see, and the second is the people
who say “maybe” or “I’ll think it over.” With that in mind we attempt to so
thoroughly cover these areas of selling throughout this book that “think it
over” is changed to “sign me up.”

29
Using Questions to Close the Sale
Question: How do you persuade people to take action? Answer: You
persuade by asking questions which lead the prospect to a conclusion which
demands that he take action because it becomes an idea which he (the
prospect) originated. This is pressure which the prospect puts on himself.
It’s internal pressure and it’s powerful.
To paraphrase Socrates—who may have said it best—“If you make a
statement to which your prospect will readily agree (cannot refute), then ask
a series of questions based on that agreement, and then ask a concluding
question based on those agreements . . . , you will force the desired
response.” This is precisely the method used by successful trial attorneys to
transfer their feelings to juries.

Selling Isn’t Telling—It’s Asking
The ability to ask questions—much like the ability to modulate and use
your voice properly—is a skill which is badly neglected and
underdeveloped in the world of selling. It’s a skill which we as people have
unlearned. I say this because the average six-year-old child, under normal
circumstances, will ask something like four to seven hundred questions a
day, while the average college graduate will ask approximately thirty. If you
know anything at all about life or if you’ve been around children at all, you
surely know the six-year-old child is getting more than the college graduate.
Asking questions is an important skill that can be learned.
I’m going to give you a number of questions and some of the
circumstances under which they can be used. Again, I urge you to adapt

these to your situation because all of them will not completely fit you.
Nevertheless, in many cases the idea would be appropriate.
Some questions tie in with the assumptive attitude; others have to do with
imagination and impending events and any number of other techniques.
Example: In the showing of a home you could, after getting acquainted with
the family, simply ask, as sales trainer Tom Hopkins suggests you do when
you enter the living room, “Where would you place the sofa in this room?”
In another room, “Where would you put Johnny’s bed? Would you prefer it
against the wall or more in the center of the room?” I remind you there is no
way the prospect can get irritated with you at an answer he gives you.
Another question: “If this beautiful home had only this gorgeous view or if
the tour of the home ended with this magnificent living-den and kitchen, it’s
already exciting to see, isn’t it?” Or “If this house had nothing but this
location, it would merit consideration, wouldn’t it?”
To set up a closing situation for later in the interview, sometimes you can
use this as a lead-in: “Mr. Prospect, many years ago Andrew Carnegie, the
man who was responsible for developing forty-three millionaires when
millionaires were truly rare, said, ‘Show me a man who can make a
decision, act on that decision, and stay with that decision, and I’ll show you
a man who will succeed.’ Successful businessmen are almost unanimous in
their agreement on this principle, but what’s your personal feeling about
this?” Most will agree.
You will use this one when you are talking with a businessperson about
an investment in equipment, machinery, or efficiency systems. It would not
work if you were selling a young couple some furniture they weren’t sure
they could afford.

Sixteen “Question” Closes
Almost identical to a real estate situation, if you’re demonstrating a
computer or a piece of equipment, you can ask, “If this were the only
feature this machine had, it would be well worth owning, wouldn’t it?”
Question: “When we install this equipment, would you like for me to
demonstrate the major features again?”

Question: “Would you prefer we deliver today, or would next week fit
your schedule better?”
Question: “Would you like for me to mark this one sold while we check
on the most agreeable terms to finance it for you?”
Question: “Do you need to consult with anyone else before you place the
order?”
Question: “Is the purchase order issued from this department?”
Question: “Would you like to have your bank finance this, or would you
like for us to work out the financial arrangements?”
Question: “Since the item is in short supply, would you be willing to wait
three weeks for delivery?”
Question: “Would you want to make a large deposit so the monthly
deposits are smaller, or would you prefer a minimum deposit and slightly
larger monthly deposits?”
Question: “Would you prefer this in green, or does the red appeal to you
more?”
Question: “Shall we ship it by UPS or air express?”
Question: “Do you want the lot registered in your name or your wife’s
name?”
Question: “Do you prefer the lot on the golf course, or does the one on
the lake appeal to you most?”
Question: “If you saw that it was to your advantage to own this product
and the terms we work out are satisfactory, would you have any objections
to going ahead today?”
Question: “Can you see the financial advantage to reducing the use of
those powerful overhead lights which provide unneeded light in some areas
in favor of using point-of-impact lighting during certain times of the day?”
Question: “Do you believe it’s wise to invest in solidly constructed
equipment which will give you long, trouble-free operation for the lifetime
of the product?”

Questions for Decisions

Many questions really are “thinking” questions and actually lead the
prospect to the decision.
Mark Gardner, whom we mentioned earlier, like all professionals, asks a
lot of fact-finding and closing questions. Here are a few which are selfexplanatory:
Question: “Are you investing in the stock market at the present time?”
Question: “Are you seeking capital gains or income?”
Question: “Could you give me a measure of the degree of risk you wish
to take? Are you aggressive or conservative?”
Question: “What does your portfolio consist of?”
1. Biggest winner
2. Largest position
Question: “Please, if you will, give me an example of your last
transaction? And when?”
Question: “Usually we are looking for commitments anywhere from
______ dollars to ______ dollars. How much capital do you normally
commit?”
“Mr. Prospect, I would like to make an agreement with you as one
businessman to another. First, I’m not going to waste your time. Second,
when we come back to you it will be with a major strategic suggestion. For
these reasons we want you to give it serious consideration for a major
commitment. Now, Mr. Prospect, given all these parameters of the
investment, would you be in a position to make a prompt decision?”
This series leads directly to a close:
“Of the stocks you own, do you have any that have not lived up to your
expectations? How long have you held the stock? I know I am asking you
to make a very difficult decision. Why have you not sold this when it hasn’t
performed? Why? Because:
1. There is a loss involved.
2. A common mistake by most investors is that you hope the stock will
somehow come back.
“Wouldn’t you agree with this?

“In the real world, not every situation we invest in works out. Isn’t it best
that we recognize it hasn’t worked out, for whatever reasons, and make the
decision to rectify this situation by moving out of __________ and
positioning into __________?”

These Questions Close Sales
The late Charles Roth, describing how a leasing agent for swanky offices
in New York City handled the question-assumption approach, gave this
example. The salesman would take the prospect to a beautiful view of the
Hudson River and ask, “You love this view, don’t you?” The prospect
would invariably answer, “Yes, it’s beautiful.” Then the salesman would
lead him to a suite on the other side of the building and ask the question,
“Do you like this view as well as the other?” The prospect either did or
didn’t. Assuming he didn’t, the salesman would say, “Then the other suite is
the one you want, isn’t it?” And the sale was often closed.

The “Choice” Close
When I was in the table-appointments business, selling single girls china,
flatware, and crystal, one of our most difficult and important tasks was to
lead the girl in the selection of the right pattern and yet make certain it was
her choice.
We started with china, and since we had seven patterns, we handled it
this way: The first pattern we offered was one we knew she would like, a
“safe” pattern. Whether she necessarily loved it or not was another matter.
After we’d displayed and “romanced” it, we reached for the second pattern
and demonstrated it. After showing the second one we asked the girl,
“Mary, if these were the only two china patterns in the whole world and you
had to make your choice right now as to which one you were going to
choose, which one of these two would you choose?”
After she made her choice we put the other pattern away.
We followed this procedure through to the last pattern, and in most cases
the final choice was relatively easy. As she chose that final pattern we gave
her one more choice as the close: “Mary, would you want this in the fivepiece or the seven-piece place settings?” When we got the answer we
proceeded to fill out the order.

Years ago, when my friend Mike Ingram was president of Tufts & Son
out of Oklahoma City, I laughingly referred to him as “America’s Number
One Rat Bait Salesman,” because he was. Mike and his company used a
number of ideas to promote rat bait sales, but one of the things they
promoted with their dealers was a .22 rifle. Mike had trained his people to
close the sale after explaining the promotion with this question: “Did you
want the six-case promotion or would you prefer the one with nine cases
and get this beautiful .22 rifle as the promotional gift?” By using this
promotional procedure, Tufts & Son broke every sales record in history
selling—that’s right—rat bait!
Question: “Did you want this single light globe, or would you like three
for the 15 percent discount?” In many cases you can move the customer to a
larger order by simply asking that or a similar question. The entire
questioning process is an involvement procedure, and as Harry Overstreet
so eloquently expressed it, “The very essence of all power to influence lies
in getting the other person to participate.” Get ’em involved—your
chances of the sale dramatically improve.
Question: “If I show you something that could save you or your firm a
great deal of money, are you in a position to act on it now?”
Incidentally, one question you don’t ask a prospect is, “What do you
think about this?” As I said earlier, the “thinking” brain is only 10 percent
as large as the “feeling” brain and people generally do not buy logically.
They buy emotionally. They buy what they want and not necessarily what
they need. Ask, “How do you feel about this?” and you’ve got an infinitely
better chance to make the sale.

The “Tie Down” Close Revisited
The late Doug Edwards perfected and taught the following technique,
which he called the “Tie Down.” He used it with great effectiveness.
Frequently a customer will ask a question such as, “Does this come in
green?” If you say yes, you still are no closer to the sale. If he asks, “Does
this come in green?” you ask him a question: “Do you want it if it comes in
green?” When he responds to that question—he’s bought. You nail it down
with, “We can have it for you in three weeks, or would you prefer that I put
a rush on it so you can have it in just two weeks?”

If he asks you, “Do the draperies come with the house?” you ask, “Do
you want it if the draperies come with the house?” Or “Will you take it if I
can make arrangements for the draperies to come with the house?” You’re
tying him down with that question. Doug would automatically or
instinctively end his questions or statements with a tie-down such as: “This
is beautiful in red, isn’t it?” “The added weight gives much greater comfort,
doesn’t it?” “The extra horsepower is a real bonus, isn’t it?” “This extra
economy will steamroll the competition, won’t it?” “The additional color
gives it an added dimension, doesn’t it?” “This evening view should give
you a lot of beautiful memories, shouldn’t it?” Each tie-down is emotionally
committing the prospect to taking action on your offer, and when you wrap
your offer in an obligating question, the sale is more probable than possible.
(Your next reading of Secrets will make you even more aware of the tiedowns I’ve used throughout the book, won’t it?)
Of special importance in the tie-down procedure is the fact that you
should use contractions to emphasize certain points. Sales trainer Phil
Lynch said you should avoid the use of not at all costs. Use isn’t, shouldn’t,
wouldn’t, can’t, couldn’t, doesn’t, won’t, etc. Avoid is not, should not, would
not, cannot, could not, does not, will not, etc.
Now you go to work and start developing specific questions for your
product and customers. Remember: The professional salesperson works at
learning how to be more professional. It is not easy—but the emotional
satisfaction and financial rewards are enormous.

The “Permanent Customer” Close
If you sell in a furniture store, a clothing store, or any kind of retail outlet
where customers come in and say, “I’d like to see a suit,” you smile and say,
“With pleasure; men’s suits are over here.” Start in that direction, take about
a half-dozen steps, turn, and say, “It will be helpful if I know whether this
suit is for a special occasion, or would you like for it to blend with the rest
of your wardrobe so that you can get maximum mileage out of your
clothing dollars?”
This approach not only helps you make the immediate sale, but it also
plants the suggestion that you are capable of and interested in helping him
solve any future wardrobe problems. You are displaying a strong

professional approach and a sincere interest in being a problem solver. Your
initial question is the opening to the “Permanent Customer” Close.
An almost identical approach is effective in most retail outlets (furniture
stores, specialty shops, general merchandisers, etc.). In a furniture store the
prospect might come in and express an interest in a lamp, rug, or sofa. You
smile and say, “I’ll be pleased to help you; they are right over here.” You
start in that direction as you say, “By the way, did you want this as an
individual item or did you want it to blend with the rest of your décor so
you get maximum mileage from your furniture dollars?” This procedure
leads your prospect to make a decision of more significance than just the
momentary one of buying the particular item he asked about.
I deal with and use questions in every segment of Secrets of Closing the
Sale. There is no doubt in my mind that your career as a salesperson will
move forward faster as a direct result of learning how to ask questions and
how to use the proper voice inflection than from any other skills you might
develop.
Most salespeople know the importance of asking questions, but too many
of them make a couple of serious mistakes in the questioning process. First
of all, they take the “police investigator” approach and are a little too
aggressive and assertive. The salesman’s attitude is critical. He must
remember the service attitude is the one to take. He should never ask the
first question without getting permission. You get permission this way: “Mr.
Prospect, in order for me to determine how we might be able to help you, I
need to ask you a few questions. Do you mind if I ask them now?” This
procedure not only gets the positive response, but it also tells the prospect
why you are going to ask the questions. This clears the way for asking the
questions and subconsciously obligates the prospect to answer them.

30
For Direct Sales People
This chapter is primarily aimed at those who are in the world of direct
selling. However, I encourage you, regardless of what you do or sell, to read
these next few pages at least once, because the odds are good you will get
some ideas or techniques which you can adapt to fit your specific situation.

Know What to Do—Do What You Know
Many years ago, so the story goes, a fox and a rabbit were having a “cool
one” in the local pub. Talk turned to their common enemy, the hounds of the
local hunters. The fox rather boastfully stated he held no fear of them
because he had so many means of escape. He pointed out that if the hounds
should come, he could bolt up into the attic and hide until the danger was
safely past, or quick as a flash he could run out the door and no hound alive
could catch him. He could head for the nearest stream and run in it for a
spell until the hounds completely lost track of him. He could even go in
circles and backtrack a few times and so completely confuse the hounds
that he could then climb a tree and watch them in their quandary as they
sought to find where he was. Yes, his methods were many and his
confidence was high.
On the other hand, the rabbit rather timidly and with some
embarrassment confessed that if the hounds should come, he knew only one
thing to do, and that was to run like a “scared rabbit.”
As he said those words, they heard the baying of the hounds. The rabbit,
true to his word, hopped up and ran out the door like a scared rabbit. The
fox hesitated as he debated whether or not to bolt up into the attic and hide,
dart out the door and depend on his speed to get away, head for the stream

and lose the scent in the water, or take off and confuse the hounds with
backtracking and circling before he climbed the tree. As he debated which
method to use, the hounds rushed in and ate him.
The moral to the story is fairly simple. It’s better to use one effective
procedure or close if that’s all you know than it is to know all the
techniques in this book and not use any of them.
Secrets of Closing the Sale includes an extremely large number of closes
and procedures for several reasons. For one thing, people who sell—and the
products they sell—come from all over the board. Every conceivable kind
of person with every imaginable personality sells an incredible assortment
of goods and services. Obviously, I can’t deal with all of them, but the
techniques and principles covered in this book are quite broad in scope and
yet specific in objective. Much of what I have written is designed to help
salespeople from all walks of life be more professional and successful.
Many different approaches are taken because there are many, many
different kinds of salespeople selling to an even wider range of prospects.
One thing you have probably noticed is that most of the closes and
procedures used in Secrets of Closing the Sale are educational. Remember,
the prospect will generally say no when he doesn’t know enough to say yes,
so we need to give additional information containing reasons and excuses
(logical or emotional) as to why the prospect should, in his own interests,
say yes. In the process we need to remember, as Gerard I. Nierenberg said
in an interview published in Personal Selling Power, “Customers want to
learn but they resist being taught.”
Since you’ve come this far in the book, I have every reason to believe
you have already learned and are using the closes and techniques we’ve
already covered. I also believe you are excited about learning and applying
the procedures and techniques we will cover in the remainder of the book.

Here’s a Good Old “Oldie”
This particular close is used primarily by direct sales people, but with
certain variations it can also be used for automotive, real estate, appliance,
or major-purchase items in department and specialty stores. It is to be used
after value has been established but before all the information about your

product has been given to the prospect. (Don’t spill your popcorn in the
lobby before the movie starts.) There are several facets to this close.
To begin with, it is educational since it discloses all the details of the
transaction. It’s another one of the “oldies” which is old because it’s good.
It works. If it didn’t work, it would be dead. When I entered the world of
selling, it was known as the “Granddaddy” Close. Some sales trainers refer
to it as the “Order Book” Close, while others call it the “Basic” Close.
The close is old, but Gene Montrose, a sales trainer from Portland,
Oregon, renamed it the “Disclosure” Close, and as I “disclose” it to you it
will be apparent why this is a much better name.

The “Disclosure” Close
Once the value has been established and the salesperson moves into the
close, he does it with these words: “Mr. and Mrs. Prospect, as you know,
Uncle Sam is now involved in many facets of our lives. Some of his
involvements are good and some of them are not so good. One of his laws
which I believe is a good one is the requirement that companies must
disclose to each buyer all the details of the transaction. This way there can
be no hidden costs. Ethical salespeople and companies applaud this
particular law.
“Our company, Mr. and Mrs. Prospect, goes the government one step
better by requiring all the information—not only on every sale but on every
offer for sale as well. That way there can be no confusion in anyone’s mind
as to what we are offering and what the costs are. Also, if you should
discuss our offer with one of your neighbors, you will find the offer we
make you is identical to the one we make to your neighbor. It will
undoubtedly please you to know you’re dealing with a company that is fair
and open with everyone.”
(Now if you will reread the last paragraph, you will note I told them we
“disclose” all the information concerning our offer to everyone. Translation:
“I am now going to write your order.”)

To the Order Form
“The order which you and I have discussed, Mr. Prospect, is number
eighty-seven. [At this point your order form is in plain view and on an

appropriate portion you write #87.] The investment for this order is three
ninety-nine ninety-five. [I say it that way and I do not put a dollar sign by
the figure. Not earth-shattering, but it is one of those “little” things which
make a difference.] Shipping and handling is twenty, which brings us to a
total of four nineteen ninety-five. The government charges us for all their
good help, so the tax comes to thirty-three fifty-five, for a grand total of
four fifty-three fifty.”
At this point the prospect will often grow concerned and say, “Now wait
a minute, I didn’t say I was going to buy anything!” To this or a similar
comment you can legitimately respond, “Well, of course not. As I
explained, I simply want you to see the exact terms of the offer we’re
making. Personally, Mr. Prospect, I believe you are the kind of person who
would never say either yes or no to anything until you knew what you were
saying yes or no to. Isn’t that right, Mr. Prospect?”

Here’s Voice Inflection Again
(It’s tough to predict what prospects are going to say unless you’re in a
training room and role-playing, but generally speaking, they will agree with
that premise.) You continue by saying, “By the way, Mr. Prospect, if [and
you really emphasize with strong voice inflection the word if] you were to
consider this program, would it be more convenient to handle it on our
twenty dollars per month investment program, or do you generally handle
amounts like this on a sixty-day cash plan?” (Wait for answer.)
In many, many cases he will say, “Well, if—and I did say if—I were to
buy this, I would put it on the twenty dollars per month program.” To this
you respond, “Oh, one thing I neglected to mention, Mr. Prospect, is that
with this order you’re given a choice of the knife sharpener or the floor
polisher. [You just moved into the “Alternate of Choice” Close.] Or you can
choose between the flatware and the stoneware.”
For those companies who do not offer extra merchandise as “buy now”
incentives, you still have the “Alternate of Choice.” “I neglected to mention
this, Mr. Prospect, but this is available either in two-tone brown or solid
gray. Which would you prefer?” This time the strength of your voice
inflection is on the word would.

I can personally tell you that in many cases the prospect will say, “Well,
if I were going to get it, I would prefer the solid gray.” You write the word
gray on the order form and say to the prospect, “In [and you mildly
emphasize the word in] getting this, would it make any difference whether
the deposits fell on the first or the fifteenth, or would the twenty-fifth be
better?”
Again, right out of the book. I cannot tell you how many times I have had
the prospect say, “Well, I don’t really suppose it makes a lot of difference,
but why don’t we make it the twenty-fifth?” At this point, for the first time,
I personalize the order by asking, “This is Mr. J. J. Johnston, isn’t it?” and I
proceed to finish writing the order.

The “Minor Decision” Close
There are several factors here. Number one, when you move into the
“Alternate of Choice,” you are getting the prospect to make a minor
decision which often will carry the major decision. Number two, even if the
prospect does not buy at this time, your efforts are still significant because
you have now educated him by clarifying the order, the terms, and the
options available.
This is important because the prospect needs this information before he
can make an intelligent or even comfortable decision. The clarification
process gives the prospect confidence he at least knows what he is making
his decision to do. Yes, clarification gives confidence.
Also, many times a prospect needs “soaking time.” On several occasions
I’ve missed the sale at this point, but later, as I was elaborating on other
features, the prospect would come back and ask a question relating to the
“Disclosure” Close: “Were those payments for twenty months or eighteen
months?” “How long will it take for delivery?” “Suppose I set it up on the
monthly program and then elect to pay it off. What’s the penalty?” Many
times the prospect says no at this stage of the game, but after some “soaking
time” and additional information, he makes a new yes decision.

He’s Balancing the Budget
On numerous occasions I have been explaining additional features and
the prospect was not hearing a word. He was thinking about other payments

which would soon be finished and then he could handle this new payment.
That’s one of the reasons the “Disclosure” Close needs to be used fairly
soon after you have given the prospect enough reasons to justify a purchase.
This close clarifies the prospect’s thinking and gives him the solid, basic
information for making the decision he needs to make. It is not designed to
manipulate anyone into buying something he does not need, does not want,
or cannot afford. It is effective when dealing with legitimate prospects who
are hesitant and need a little gentle persuasion to act in their own best
interests.

The “Tennis Racket” Close
I’m confident I am accurate with the statement that every veteran
salesman has completed a presentation to a husband-wife team only to be
confronted with this dialogue: Husband: “What do you think, honey?”
Wife: “Well, that’s entirely up to you.” Husband: “No, you’d be the one to
use it.” Wife: “Yeah, but you’d be the one to pay for it,” and he says . . . and
she says . . . and he says . . . and back and forth it goes.
When this happens, you can rest assured that one of the three situations
exists. Number one, both of them want to say yes; number two, neither of
them wants to say yes; or number three, one votes yes and one votes no.
However, you can be even more certain that neither one of them wants to
make the decision. Each one keeps knocking the ball back to the other one’s
court by saying, “You make the decision.”
Since they are knocking the ball back and forth across the net, we call
this one the “Tennis Racket” Close. It’s important you understand that if
you just sit on the sidelines and watch the “game” and permit them to knock
that ball across the net more than a couple of times, one of them (and most
of the time it’s the husband) will smile and say, “I know we’re going to buy
your product, but unfortunately, she can’t make up her mind.”

Handle It This Way
Here’s how you avoid that situation. After the couple has knocked that
decision ball back and forth across the net a couple of times, hold up your
hand and say, “Scuse me.” (In some sections of the country where people
have peculiar accents, they might say “Ex-cuse me,” but that is wrong. Yes,

for those of you who take everything literally, my tongue is in my cheek!)
“Maybe I should not say this, but I will. At this point I do not think that
either of you folks should make the decision. Now before you think I’m
presumptuous, let me explain. At the moment both of you are emotionally
involved, and that is the worst possible time to make decisions.
“The reason is simple. If you say yes, sometime later one of you might
well say, ‘Well, I tried to get you not to buy that thing!’ If you say no,
sometime later one of you might say, ‘If you remember, I tried to get you to
go ahead.’ Regardless of whether you say yes or no, because of the
emotional involvement it could be the wrong decision.”

The “Ben Franklin” Close
I include this close in the chapter primarily designed for direct sales
people, but to be candid I cannot think of a single sales situation—and very
few situations in life—in which this approach would not be practical. I
challenge you to put your imagination to work on this one and use it in your
life. When you are choosing a house, car, job, school, vacation site, church,
or anything else, this approach can be extremely helpful. With this lead-in,
do I need to remind you that your prospect will also find it helpful in
making the right decision? I have no idea where this close was born or who
originated it, but my friend Bill Cranford taught it to me in 1947. Now on
with the close.
“Instead of handling the decision emotionally, let me suggest we borrow
a page from the life of one of the wisest men our country ever produced.
His name was Benjamin Franklin. When he was confronted with a difficult
decision, he would take a sheet of paper and draw a line down the center.
On the left-hand side he wrote ‘Reasons For,’ and on the right-hand side he
wrote ‘Ideas Opposed.’ (This was altered slightly by the late Percy Whiting,
author of The Five Great Rules of Selling.)
“What I suggest, Mr. Prospect, is that we follow the same procedure,
which in its simplest form is to look at the facts for and against the purchase
and then let the facts make the decision. By following that procedure, folks,
neither one of you can be wrong and, regardless of what you decide, you
both will be right. Does that idea appeal to you, Mr. and Mrs. Prospect?”
(You can depend on it—it does!)

Here’s Why You Should Go Ahead
(At this point you take your talking pad and draw a line down the middle
and print “Reasons For” on the top left side and “Ideas Opposed” on the top
right side.) “There are many reasons you should go ahead.”
You say, “Number one, you like it.” However, you don’t number the
reasons for or against the purchase until you sum them up. You do not
number the “Reasons For” because it provokes a numbers contest between
“Reasons For” and “Ideas Opposed.” The prospect might construe this as a
challenge to try to come up with more reasons against. Some of the “Ideas
Opposed” could be utterly ridiculous, but their very mention creates a
ludicrous and therefore potentially losing situation, regardless of which side
has the largest number of reasons.
You make “You like it” number one because people buy what they want
—not necessarily what they need. “Number two [remember, you say
“number two,” but you don’t write the number], you stated you feel our
product will save money.” (Continue this process as you list all the reasons
for buying.)

Now you go to the “Ideas Opposed.” You start this list by saying, “One
of the reasons you should not buy today is . . .” (now you list the major
objection they have harped on during the presentation). You need to bring
out the dominant reason or objection they have been giving you. If you
don’t, they will—and it removes some of the sting if you bring it out. Then
you keep quiet and let your prospect list the other reasons why not. If
you’ve done your job, you will have far more yes reasons than they will
have no reasons.

You Assume the Sale

Now you add the totals as you say, “Let’s see, that’s one, two, three,” etc.
Write the number in a large, bold figure (let’s say it’s ten) and circle it
several times. “The ‘Ideas Opposed’ are one, two, three,” etc. Write the
number for the total (let’s say it’s seven) and circle it several times. At that
point, according to Percy Whiting, you turn the pad toward the prospect and
ask, “Mr. Prospect, which of these weighs heaviest? The ‘Reasons For’
going ahead or the ‘Ideas Opposed’?” (Let him answer.)
At this point, as the late Charlie Cullen would say, you add a little
audacity as you look up from your talking pad and into your prospect’s
eyes, stick out your hand, and say, “You know, Mr. Prospect, if all the
people I deal with used such a logical, commonsense approach to making
decisions, my business would be even more fun than it is! You’re going to
love this product!”
Many times salesmen ask, “Zig, does that kind of stuff really work?” The
answer is, “No, not all the time. But it will work some of the time.” That’s
the prime reason the presentation or conviction part of the sales process
should start with the strongest benefit and end with the second-strongest
benefit. This is important because the prospect is more likely to remember
what you said and did as you opened and closed your presentation.
A couple of pertinent observations are in order. Number one, the prospect
can come up with just one reason why not and still say, “I’m not going to
get it; I don’t care how many reasons ‘for’ you’ve got!” Number two,
prospects don’t buy anything for ten reasons. In most cases, they buy for
one major reason and one minor reason.

This Sells the Kinfolk, Too
The reason you make the list is so the prospect can see the logic of the
concept. This could have a bearing. Also, many times when people buy they
need reinforcement, so when they discuss their purchase with husbands,
wives, relatives, friends, etc., they have some additional facts to give them.
Many people happily buy and then later cancel because their acquaintances
either kid or ridicule them for having made what they consider a poor
decision. This process of listing these reasons in this “Ben Franklin” Close
not only helps to make the sale but many times helps to keep the sale.

Because of this I encourage you to follow the process. Later I cover what
I call “emotional logic” and will give you more of the reasons why I
strongly encourage you to use it.
Every close should be an educational process, and although this one does
not give any new reasons for buying, it does sum up the ones previously
covered. This helps to reassure the prospect and give him added confidence
that his new decision (in the event he earlier had said no) is the right
decision.
There are two other important factors. First, a prospect can be given all
the facts concerning goods, products, or services and still miss the major
point. Second, a prospect can get all the facts and still make the wrong
decision. The “Ben Franklin” Close helps to make certain the prospect
doesn’t miss the major point, and the summation process further reduces the
chances of the prospect making the wrong decision.

The “Pedestal” Close
This is one you use in a husband-wife situation when the wife rather
forcefully speaks up during part of the demonstration or close and says,
“We can’t afford it!” When this happens, generally speaking, one of two
situations exists. She either rules the roost (or as we would say down home,
she wears the pants in the family), or she is at the other end of the scale and
is completely dominated by the husband.
If hers is the latter situation, she makes the statement for point-scoring
and/or self-sacrificing purposes. She is trying to curry favor with her
husband by showing him she is willing to “give up” something which he
might think she wants in order to gain future favors and benefits which
would be worth more to her.
In either event, if you’re going to get the sale, you’re going to have to put
her on a pedestal for her husband to see and so you can deal with her from a
more advantageous position.
When she says, “We can’t afford it,” you smile as you turn to the
husband and say, “You know, Mr. Prospect, it always excites me when I
hear a wife make that kind of statement. I say this because I believe she
made that statement because she’s afraid you might buy this just for her.

Frankly, Mr. Prospect, I don’t believe your wife wants this product just for
herself. It’s refreshing to know there are folks like your wife in our country,
isn’t it? [What can the man say but something nice?] You, Mr. Prospect, are
certainly fortunate to find such an unselfish helpmate. Of course, she’s
fortunate, too, because I’m going to bet you’re the kind of man who is
going to express your appreciation for having such a special wife in a very
real and concrete way.”

The “Right” Words Plus Good Voice Inflection Equals Sale
Let’s pause now and look at the position in which you have placed both
of them. First, you have placed her on a pedestal. From here on in, that lady
is going to think you’re a very astute salesman. She will be willing to listen
to you because you make sense and, most importantly, you have made her
feel important. You’re in pretty good shape with the husband, too, because
not only have you challenged him to be his best self by supplying his wife
with a want/need but you’ve also complimented him.
With this thought in mind, you continue the sales process. “Actually, Mr.
and Mrs. Prospect, nobody is making any kind of sacrifice for anybody,
because even though the wife might be the one to use the product, everyone
in the family is going to benefit and it is the entire family we’re concerned
about, isn’t it?
“Yes, Mr. Prospect, it’s obvious that your wife wants the product [Now
here are the key words. Lower your voice, look the husband in the eye, and
say], but worse than she wants it, she wants you to want her to have it. Isn’t
that right, Mrs. Prospect?”
I can’t tell you the number of times I’ve had the lady say, “Well, yeah, it
would be nice to have,” and then before she can say anything else, I offer a
handshake to the husband and say, “Mr. Prospect, I’d like to congratulate
you twice—first for having married this kind of lady and second for being
the kind of man who expresses his appreciation in a very positive way. You
are going to love this product!”
Does That Stuff Really Work? The answer is yes, these procedures work
—some of the time. Remember, too, that each close you use gives your
prospect another chance to go ahead and make a new decision. He now has

more facts for a new decision or more emotional involvement, which means
the prospect is exerting inner pressure on himself to buy.
I remind you, too, that each close should be a process which raises the
value of the product or service in the prospect’s mind. Obviously, if you
keep raising that value in the prospect’s mind, if you know and use enough
emotional and/or educational closes, you will eventually have value higher
than the price, and therefore theoretically you will always make the sale.
That is actually what would always happen if your prospect were a
computer. Obviously, he is a person and not a computer. So much for the
theory. But this I promise. The closing procedures I’m describing will
increase your closing percentage, and in many cases that increase will be
substantial. Remember, too, if you are strictly on commission, each 1
percent in increased closing effectiveness will increase your net income
from 2 to 10 percent, because your costs remain almost exactly the same.

The “Hat in Hand” Close
Many times in the sales world, try as you might, you will be unable to
“smoke out” the real reason the prospect is not buying. It’s frustrating to
sense the presence of a sale and yet miss it because the prospect won’t level
with you. There is obviously a limit as to how far you can go with a
prospect before you not only cause him not to buy but permanently lose any
chance of having him as a future customer. When it becomes obvious that
you are backing up and your probing, persistence, and questioning approach
is not producing results, the “Hat in Hand” approach has been known to
work. I learned the basic procedure from Bill Cranford, my first sales
trainer. Later, Doug Edwards and Dick Gardner added the refining touches.
Here’s the way it works.
When it is clear you have missed the sale, you “fold your tent” by putting
your samples or your papers into your briefcase. In yesteryear all
salespeople wore hats, so the name “Hat in Hand” Close was born in those
days. Today some sales trainers call it the “Lost Sale” Close. As you pack
your papers, giving every indication of leaving, you express your
appreciation to the prospect for his time and express the hope that at some
future date you will be able to do business with him. You get up to leave
and as you head for the door, you turn to the prospect and say, “Mr.

Prospect, I’m embarrassed to ask you this, but it would mean a lot to my
career if you would help me by answering a question [an amazing number
of people are willing to help and will indicate this willingness].” You then
say, “Obviously, you have not done any business with us today and that’s all
right. I certainly don’t sell everybody. I had hoped you would buy because I
thought our product fit your needs. However, you have chosen not to buy
and I feel badly about it because I did not explain it thoroughly enough to
make the benefits more obvious. It would really be helpful to me, as I call
on other people, if you would identify the mistakes I made and where I
dropped the ball as a salesman.”
You will get an amazing number of answers, but in most cases they will
say, “It wasn’t your fault at all. We didn’t buy because . . .” and at this point
they will bring up the real reason. When this happens, you clap your hands
or snap your fingers and say, “Oh, boy! Did I ever blow it! No wonder you
hesitated to act until now! Had I been in your shoes, I would have done
exactly the same thing. How could I have made such a mistake?”
You quickly open your briefcase, give him the answer to the objection,
and close by asking if this makes the difference in his decision. This doesn’t
happen often, but from personal experience I can tell you there is the
occasional sale which can be gained with this method. When it happens, it’s
a total bonus because it was a sale which, for all practical purposes, had
been completely lost.
Two things I emphasize: First, make it extremely brief, and if you don’t
immediately get the order, it’s time to graciously make your departure.
Second point: If you truly believe you and your product can serve the
prospect, then you really are acting in his best interests. This procedure
requires a degree of audacity or boldness, but one way to be an “old”
salesman instead of an “ex” salesman is to be a bold salesman.

Suppose the Prospect Says Nothing
From time to time a sales situation arises which can be frustrating and
difficult. The salesperson asks an obligating question and the prospect says
absolutely nothing. It might have happened to you, and if it hasn’t, I can
assure you that your day is coming.

After asking the obligating question, you sit there and say nothing. He
sits there and says nothing. In short, nobody says anything. Years ago there
was a school of thought which taught that the one who spoke first was
going to lose. Fifteen or twenty years ago that might have been true, but
today, with one exception, which I cover in chapter 35, that is generally not
true. Here’s why: The buyers of today are more knowledgeable and
sophisticated and the ask-the-obligating-question-and-keep-your-mouthshut approach has been around so long that many prospects are aware of it.
There is also a good chance the prospect wasn’t listening or didn’t clearly
understand the question. He might have been thinking about other things
and suddenly realized you were quiet and wondered why. Another reason
this approach may not be sound is that the prospect might feel you are using
pressure, resent it, and decide to “wait you out.” That could be timeconsuming.

The “Mother” Close
Here is a better approach. When you ask the obligating question and get
no response, wait a reasonable length of time. How long is that? I have no
idea, because it will vary. Experience and your commonsense feeling will
dictate the length of time, but it will generally be from ten to sixty seconds.
However, I can tell you this: When you see the red start up the prospect’s
neck, before it gets to his earlobes it’s time for you to say something. Look
him in the eye, smile, and say, “Mr. Prospect, when I was a little fellow [or
a little girl], my mother told me silence gave consent. Mr. Prospect, do you
think my mother was telling me the truth?”
This breaks the silence and puts the ball back in the prospect’s court. The
question is, what is the prospect going to do? I don’t think he will say, “No,
your mother was a liar!” You might wonder if this is “pressure selling.”
Could be—but its primary purpose is to help the prospect put pressure on
himself. The next story will be helpful in further clarifying the point while
teaching you how to get permission from the prospect to help him apply
that pressure to himself.

The Chuck Adkins Story

From time to time, despite our preconceived ideas, pet formulas, and set
approaches, along comes an individual who upsets all our theories and
ideas. Chuck Adkins was such a man. Chuck didn’t “look like” a salesman.
Twenty minutes after he shaved, he looked like he needed to shave again.
He was not a fat man, but he had an extremely large stomach which hung
well over his belt. He wore loafers which had never seen the soft side of a
brush or shine cloth. Stealing a line from the old Pepsodent toothpaste
commercial, you didn’t “wonder where the yellow went” when you saw
Chuck smile.
He should never have been hired, because he didn’t have a car and he
didn’t “fit” with the rest of the salespeople. However, he did have a bicycle
and the six-dollar bond fee. Considerably more important, hiring Chuck
represented a promotion for an ambitious young dealer.
The rules were clear that dealers had to have five people in production to
qualify for the promotion, and the young man who hired Chuck had four
and needed only one more. Chuck was given a contract with the full
expectation that he would be in and out of the business in about three days.
However, Chuck fooled us all. Not only did he stay but in short order he
was the leader among the five. Then he quickly became the leader in the
entire area, then number one in the state, number one in the entire South,
and number seven in the nation.
Despite his physical appearance (actually, he “cleaned up” pretty good),
Chuck was a hard worker and had this “difficult to put your finger on”
quality called “charm.” I watched the growth of Chuck strictly through the
reports and through phone conversations with his manager. When he took
over as the number one man in the South, I decided it was time to go see
what he was doing. By then Chuck had moved to Georgetown, South
Carolina, and was working for a dealership promotion himself.
I arrived in Georgetown bright and early Monday morning so I could
watch him handle all phases of the business. I observed how he booked
demonstrations. I observed him putting on a demonstration, and I watched
him closing sales. I tell Chuck’s story because there are three lessons which
will help all of us be more productive in our chosen field. I’ll get to those
lessons in a moment.

Never will I forget the demonstration I viewed that evening. Chuck and
his helper cooked a full-demonstration meal for several couples. Personally,
I was embarrassed to be there. Never have I seen such a messy, sloppy
demonstration. I was delighted that I did not have to eat any of the food.
Nevertheless, the couples seemed to enjoy themselves, and Chuck did a
good job of getting his points across. When the demonstration was over, he
made appointments with the couples who had been invited, and when they
had made their departure, Chuck sat down to close the sale with the host
and hostess.
On the surface, Chuck was friendly, jovial, easygoing, and apparently
even lackadaisical in his approach to life in general and business in
particular. However, when it came time to close the sale, Chuck went
straight for the jugular. I was really amazed that I had worked with the man
all day and had not seen even a hint of this “killer instinct” which leaped to
the surface. He really sat on the host and hostess and in the process threw
common sense and judgment out the window. As a net result, after a few
minutes the host almost literally exploded as he slapped his hand down on
the table, hopped up, and with considerable heat, proceeded to tell Chuck he
did not respond to any such “high-pressure tactics,” and he would never buy
from any high-pressure salesman.

The “Pressure Permission” Close
As I sat there in some amusement, some fright, and some embarrassment,
I wondered how Chuck was going to extricate himself from this situation.
In my mind there was no way Chuck could do anything other than save his
hide. The possibility of a sale was so remote that it was—to my way of
thinking—nonexistent.
What happened next was something I’ll never forget. Chuck remained as
cool as anyone I’ve ever seen in my life. He simply sat there with a stunned
look on his face. Then he slowly shook his head from side to side. Halfway
talking to himself and halfway talking to me and the prospect, he said, “Mr.
Prospect, I wouldn’t have had this happen for anything in the world! I am
terribly, terribly embarrassed. Mr. Zig [that’s what he called me] is my boss,
and I’m afraid he’s going to think that I am a high-pressure salesman like
you say I am. Actually, Mr. Prospect, I hate high-pressure salesmen worse

than you do, and if you thought I was using pressure on you, I don’t blame
you a bit for getting upset. I would have done exactly the same thing. I
especially hate it because here I am, a guest in your home, and you were
kind enough to invite in your friends and neighbors to see a demonstration
as a favor to me, so I am just terribly, terribly sorry and embarrassed about
the whole thing. I don’t in the least blame you for getting upset, because if I
thought somebody was using high pressure on me, I would get upset, too.”
This little speech probably took about two minutes, but Chuck’s calm
manner and sincerity—combined with the fact that he had kept his seat—
worked miracles on the prospect. After a moment or two, he sat back down
and Chuck asked, “Mr. Prospect, will you accept my apology, and can we
still be friends?” With that, the old farmer smiled and said, “Well, I don’t
guess there’s any harm done,” and with that Chuck extended his hand and
the two men shook on the friendship agreement.
What happened next is one of those things which you see and hear— and
please believe me when I say I was all eyes and ears—but even after you
see it and hear it, you ask yourself, “Did I really see and hear what I saw
and heard?” At this point Chuck said, “Mr. Prospect, I guess I just got
carried away, but would you mind if I asked you a question?” Prospect:
“No, go ahead.” Chuck: “Mr. Prospect, if I saw that you were about to make
a mistake which would cost you money and cause your wife to do a lot of
extra and unnecessary work, would you appreciate it if I told you about it or
would you just figure it was none of my business?” Prospect: “If you saw
me about to make a serious financial mistake that would also cause my wife
to do extra work, I’d want you to let me know about it.”
At that point Chuck gave him the big ol’ Pepsodent grin and, with the
innocence of a newborn babe, said, “Well, Mr. Prospect, that’s exactly what
I was trying to do—and you got upset with me. Now I’m willing to try it
one more time if you’ll promise me you won’t get upset with me.” To my
utter astonishment, the man promised to keep his cool and Chuck proceeded
to close that sale.
In reflecting on the situation, Chuck Adkins, this man who was
functionally illiterate, had taught me an important sales lesson. He had
literally asked for permission to apply pressure to the prospect—and the
prospect had willingly granted that permission. The question “Mr. Prospect,

if I saw that you were about to make a serious mistake which would cost
you lots of money and cause your wife to do unnecessary work, would you
appreciate it if I told you about it or would you figure it was none of my
business?” asked for permission to use pressure. It worked. Chuck made the
sale.
The second great lesson I learned from Chuck Adkins was the
importance of positive expectancy when you deal with every prospect. As
I’ve indicated, Chuck’s education was limited. He could fill out an order if
the customer gave the standard order with standard payments. If the
customer substituted a coffeemaker for a juicer, bought an extra utility pan,
changed the payments in any way, or made any other changes which were
not precisely detailed in the chart, then Chuck was lost. Fully one-third of
the orders Chuck sent us did not have a total as far as the size of the sale
was concerned. Chuck handled those orders this way.
“Mr. Prospect, I don’t know exactly what your total is, but it’s about
$________, so just go ahead and give me forty dollars as the deposit and
Mr. Zig will figure out the exact amount of the order.” Incredibly enough,
virtually no one ever argued with or questioned Chuck. They gave him the
money and Chuck wrote the order because Chuck expected the customer to
give him the order.
The third great lesson Chuck taught me was that all of us can learn
valuable lessons and techniques from some unlikely people. The fact that
Chuck taught how to get permission to use a little pressure does not mean
that Chuck knew more about selling than you and I know. It does mean that
Chuck knew at least one technique which was new to me.
Message: Learn whenever and wherever lessons are being taught.

PART 6

The Keys in Closing
OBJECTIVES
To sell you a philosophy as it specifically relates to the world of selling
and to give you the keys in closing or persuading.
To share additional ideas, methods, techniques, and procedures that will
increase your sales effectiveness on a daily basis and enhance your
career for a lifetime.
CLOSES AND/OR PROCEDURES
The “Sure Sale” Close
The “Neiman-Marcus” Close
The “Assumptive” Close Revisited
The “Kreepy Krauly” Close
The “Smell Good” Close
The “Proper Dress” Close
The “Look and Listen” Close
The “Enthusiasm” Close
The “Presidential” Close
The “Three Question” Close
The “Greatest Salesman” Close
The “Dinner Out” Close
The “Hep ’Em Git It” Close
The “Impending Event” Close

The “Pressure Belief” Close
The “I Can Get ’Em” Close
The “I’ll Treat You Right” Close
The “And Then Some” Close
The “Integrity” Close
The “Signature” Close
The “Narrative” Close

31
Four Ideas and the Keys
to Sales Success
I start this segment with four ideas which you need to buy.
First idea: There is not now, there never has been, and there never will be
an outstanding salesperson, one who climbs to the top, one who breaks the
records and sells more than anyone else; there’s never been a real sales
champion who was “normal.” In every single case they are a little bit
“warped” in their belief in what they are selling.
It is beyond their wildest imagination how anybody could possibly even
remotely entertain the idea of thinking about saying no. Because they feel
this strongly about what they sell, by the very force of their convictions, by
the depth of their belief, by their enthusiasm, they are able to persuade
many people who are not really hot prospects to go ahead and buy.
However, despite all their zeal, enthusiasm, and belief, they inevitably
will encounter that stubborn, hardheaded, nonbelieving individual who is
still going to say no. When this happens it could create a problem in the
mind of the salesperson. His belief in what he sells is so deep he
rationalizes that no prospect would say no if he clearly understood and
believed the salesperson’s claims about the product. He therefore
rationalizes that the prospect is not saying no to the product—it’s too good
—but rather the prospect is saying no to the salesperson. In short, with this
attitude the salesperson is going to—if he or she is not careful—feel
rejected.

Refusal or Rejection
Second idea: The salesperson must clearly understand the difference
between refusal and rejection if he’s going to keep his ego intact and be

able to sell his product effectively. My son has clearly understood this
difference from the time he was about three years old. When he asked for
something and I said no, he did not feel rejected. He simply felt his dad had
missed the question. He waited two or three minutes and gave me another
chance to correct an obvious mistake.
When the prospect says no to you, you should be as nice to him as my
son was to me and as your children probably are to you (if you have
children). Give him (your prospect) the benefit of the doubt; give him a
chance to correct what surely is an obvious mistake. In your mind, when he
says no you should definitely feel it is a mistake and proceed from there,
giving him a chance to correct that mistake by saying yes.

No “Born” Salesmen
Third idea: You do not have to be a “natural born” salesperson in order to
be a good one. As a matter of fact, I’ve traveled almost all over the world
and I’ve seen that women have given birth to boys and I’ve seen that
they’ve given birth to girls, but thus far I’ve never seen that a woman has
given birth to a salesman. Now, I’ve seen that salesmen die, so if they’re not
born but they do die, then obviously somewhere between birth and death—
by choice and by training—they become what they decide to become,
namely, trained professional salesmen.
Message: Don’t come up with the “loser’s limp” that you are not a “born
salesman.” That’s true. But you definitely can be trained to sell and this
book is playing a part in that training.
Fourth idea: You must remember who wins in the sales transaction. I
covered this in the second chapter. If you recall, I asked if you still had all
the money you had earned in the last year of selling. Next I asked if you had
prospects who still benefited from something you sold them more than a
year ago. The answer was obvious. Hopefully, you recall that you came to
the conclusion the prospect was the big winner. When you fully understand
and believe the prospect is the big winner, you can close more
enthusiastically and forcefully because you understand that the sales
process, when followed with integrity, is something you do for someone,
not to someone.

Tie Logic and Emotion Together
Seldom is any effective close or procedure going to utilize only one
technique or principle. Here’s an example that ties emotion and logic
together with a “reduction to the ridiculous” procedure.
Remember, when a person brings up a logical objection you answer it
emotionally, and when he brings up an emotional objection you answer it
logically.
At one time I represented a bicycle company and was responsible for
much of the training of their salespeople. A common objection was the
price of the bicycle, which was about twenty dollars higher than other
bicycles that were approximately equal in quality. This particular company
emphatically claimed their bicycle had the finest brakes in the industry.
When the price objection arose, we taught the salespeople to focus on the
brakes, explaining their effectiveness, durability, and most of all, their
dependability. Frequently the customer still came back to the price
objection. At that point we instructed the salespeople to get involved in this
dialogue: Salesman: “Mr. Prospect, approximately how long do you think
your child will ride this bicycle?” Prospect: “I don’t know. Several years;
probably five, maybe even longer.” Salesman: “OK, let’s take five years—
and if this bicycle only costs twenty dollars more, that means it’s costing
you four dollars per year for the best brakes in the industry.” (We also
taught the salespeople to bring out that familiar little talking pad so the
prospect could see that the price was four dollars per year.) “Since there are
three hundred and sixty-five days in the year, Mr. Prospect, you’re talking
about little more than a penny per day for the finest brakes available for
your child’s bicycle.”
The salesperson was instructed to pause for several seconds, then quietly
say, “If these brakes enabled your child to stop when a car backs out in
front of him one time in a five-year span, they would be worth far more
than twenty dollars, wouldn’t they?” The procedure was effective because
the salespeople were absolutely convinced of the truth of the statement—or
was it a question? There was logic in the approach that a penny a day was
certainly insignificant, but the emotional impact was even greater. In the

prospect’s imagination, he could visualize his child always being able to
stop his bicycle quickly to avoid danger.

The Keys in Selling
There are eleven keys in selling which will make you more professional
and help you close more sales. These keys involve attitudes, procedures,
and techniques. In some cases all three will be involved, and in rare
instances none of these will fit you or your situation (if I could think of
even one, I’d share it with you).
As we look at the keys in closing, the very first key we’re going to look
at is what I call the “Key of Positive Projection.” I want to emphasize as
strongly as I know how that your business is never either good or bad— out
there. Your business is either good or bad between your own two ears. In
your mind you should have made the sale before you even talk to the
prospect. Whether he comes in to see you or whether you go out to see him,
you’ve got to understand, you’ve got to sell him in your mind before you
actually physically sell him. The eleven keys in selling are:
1. Positive Projection
2. The Assumptive Attitude
3. Physical Action
4. Enthusiasm
5. The Subordinate Question
6. Listen
7. The Impending Event
8. Persistence
9. Inducement
10. Sincerity
11. The Narrative Event

Just Looking!
If you work in a retail outlet, chances are good you’ve had a prospect
come in and slowly look around, and as you approach him he says, “I’m
just looking.” The question is, did you believe him when he said he was
“just looking”? I hope you did, because that’s exactly what he was doing!
Just looking.
I didn’t realize that fact for a long, long time, but in 1973, Julie, our
youngest daughter, graduated from high school. For graduation we had
promised her a new automobile, and buying that car was an exciting event.
Now let me confess that I’ve never sold automobiles, but if you were to
ask me to write a description of a super-good automobile prospect, here’s
the way I would describe that prospect: A daddy with a daughter who had
just graduated from high school. He publicly announces he’s going to buy
her a car and gives some indication he has the money to do it. From where I
sit, I’d say that’s a pretty good prospect!

Don’t Offer Charity
I had been at work when we went down to look at cars, so I was dressed
in a business suit. My daughter hadn’t been to bed the night before because
she had been getting dressed for the big event.
This was to be her first car, and she was all dolled up in her “Sunday go
to meetin” best. I was driving a fairly new “Ninety-eight” Oldsmobile, so
between the two of us we gave some indication of being at least mildly
prosperous. When she got out of our car, Julie wasn’t walking—she was
floating into that dealership.
Despite that fact, the young salesman came to us and offered charity. He
asked, “Can I help you?” Despite his charitable offer, we were in a hurry, so
I didn’t beat around the bush. I responded, “My daughter just graduated
from high school and we’re looking for a car for her as a graduation gift.”
Word of honor, he looked at us and said, “Well, if you see anything you
like, let me know,” and he turned around and walked away.
I have no idea if the young salesman stayed in the business another day. I
do know that regardless of how long he stayed in the business, he never had

a better prospect. Like most prospects, we had started with the dealership
which sold the cars my daughter was interested in.
The young salesman “blew it.” I thought he was pretty bad until we got
to the next dealership. This salesman said exactly the same words, and in
addition he had B.O. The third dealership was almost as bad, but when we
went to the fourth dealership we got lucky.

Yes—They Are “Just” Looking
What do I mean, “we got lucky”? Very simple. My daughter had dated
the salesman, so we had a connection with the dealership and were able to
buy a car. This helped me to understand two things which I had not
previously understood: First, I understood why we were having a recession.
We couldn’t get waited on! The second thing I understood was that when a
prospect comes in and says, “We’re just looking,” or “I’m just looking,”
you can bet your last nickel they are “just looking”—but it’s desperately
looking! For a salesperson! To sell them something—so they don’t have to
keep on looking!

Think as a Buyer and as a Seller
Now let me go back to chapter 8 on empathy and sympathy. You want to
hear what the prospect says and what he is saying. I want you to think as a
seller and as a buyer. When you go shopping, would you rather find what
you want in the first store or the tenth store? Odds are about forty-three to
one you would much prefer to find what you want in the first store,
wouldn’t you? As a seller, the next time somebody comes in to see you and
says he’s “just looking,” it should bring a smile instead of a frown. Careful
—don’t overreact. Don’t grab and hug—just smile.
If the shopper seems to be shy and introverted, as you smile take a step
backwards (you must come across as nonthreatening and nonpushy) and
say, “We’re delighted to have you with us. Look as long as you like. My
name is ____________, and if you would like some help, it will be a
pleasure for me. [And as an afterthought] Oh, and incidentally, if we don’t
have exactly what you want, I could probably tell you where to find it. Is
that fair enough?”

If the customer is obviously an outgoing, extroverted, hail-fellow-wellmet kind of person, you should smile broadly and say, “Congratulations!
You have just found someone who is interested in helping you find exactly
what you want. If we don’t have it, I’ll suggest the place or person who can
solve the problem. Is that fair enough?”
“Is that fair enough?” is a very vital question to ask. Our nature is such
that we have a wish, even a need, to be fair. The “Is that fair enough?”
question will almost always bring a yes answer, which means you have just
scored your first points in a sales game designed to produce two winners:
you and the prospect. To repeat myself, when the prospect says he’s “just
looking,” you really ought to be grinning all over.

The “Sure Sale” Close
This next story dramatizes the power of the Key of Positive Projection.
Several years ago a small East Coast printing company started an
expansion program. Every six months a new salesman was hired and started
his training in the office with product knowledge and procedure. Next the
new salesman went into the field with an experienced sales trainer who
taught him sales skills and technique. Finally, the new salesman got his
sales “wings” after an interview with the company president, who gave him
that last little pep talk.
On one occasion the company hired a young salesman who was
especially green and lacking in self-confidence. As a matter of fact, he was
so scared the boss figured he’d better give him a little extra help. After the
fairly standard “you can do it” pep talk, he said to the salesman, “Son, I’ll
tell you what I’m going to do. I’m going to send you across the street to see
a ‘sure sale’ prospect. This is where I always send our new salesmen for
one very simple reason—that old boy is a buyer. He always buys
something. But, son, let me give you a word of warning. He’s mean, nasty,
ornery, and foulmouthed. He’s going to make you think he’s going to bite
your head off, chew it up, and spit it out in little bitty pieces.
“Put your mind at ease, son. He’s all bark and no bite. Regardless of what
he says, I want you to hang in there and say, ‘Yes, sir, I understand, but I
have the finest printing offer in this entire city and this is what you ought to

get.’ It makes no difference what he says, you stand your ground and come
back at him. Remember—he always gives our new salesmen an order.”

Go Get ’Em, Tiger!
Our charged-up hero crossed the street, walked in the door, introduced
himself and his company, and for the next five minutes those were the only
words our young salesman had a chance to say. That old boy really tore into
him. He told him how the cow ate the cabbage in no uncertain terms. He
introduced that young man to a segment of the English language which he
had never known existed. However, our hero, because he had been
prewarned, hung in there. He said, “Yes, sir, I understand, but this is the
finest printing offer in this entire city, this is what you ought to have.” Back
and forth they went and after about thirty minutes he made the biggest sale
in the history of the printing company.
Naturally, the young salesman was excited about the order. He picked up
his briefcase, made a mad dash across the street, threw the order on the
boss’s desk, and said, “You were right about that old man! He is mean,
nasty, ornery, and foulmouthed, but I’ll tell you something else about that
nice old buzzard [our attitude is affected when the prospect buys, isn’t it?]
—he is a buyer! I’ve got the biggest order in the history of this company,
just look!”
The boss looked at the order in astonishment and said, “Oh, my
goodness, son! You called on the wrong man! That old man is the meanest,
nastiest, orneriest, most foulmouthed old goat we have ever dealt with! We
have been trying for over fifteen years to sell him something and he’s never
bought a dime’s worth of anything from any of us!”

Make the Sale—in Your Mind
Question: Where did he make the sale? Now I don’t think there’s a doubt
in your mind, is there? You know the salesman made the sale in his mind
before he crossed the street. He was using the Key of Positive Projection.
All the young man did was go across the street, totally prepared, even
willing to take some abuse because he knew he was going to make the sale.
Suppose the boss had said, “Now, son, I’m going to send you across the
street, but I don’t really know why. I’ve been sending my best people over

there for fifteen years and that old buzzard’s been chewing them up and
nobody has ever sold him a dime’s worth of anything!” How much chance
do you think he would have had to make the sale? None! All I’m saying is
that you must make the sale in your mind before you ever talk to the
prospect. This is true whether you solicit your business on a direct basis or
you run a retail business with your customers coming in to see you.
Drill-Practice-Rehearse-Project. Your planning, preparation, and
projection before you see the prospect will determine, to a large degree,
what happens after you see the prospect. It’s more than just a cliché that
spectacular performance is preceded by unspectacular preparation. In the
classroom a sales wreck (mistake) is an inexpensive learning experience.
The same wreck (mistake) with a good prospect not only is expensive for
the salesman and his company but is discouraging as well. If it is repeated
too frequently or over a period of time, it will end the career of the
salesman. Physical and mental preparation, complete with drill and
rehearsal, will get you technically and emotionally ready to sell.
This is practice without pressure. To go with this you need that mental
projection of making that sale in your mind before you see the prospect.
The beautiful things about mental practice, as Dr. Maxwell Maltz said, is
that you gain perfection on the playing field of your mind. You do
everything exactly right, respond to every question with the best possible
answer, meet every objection in the best possible way, and end up with the
sale.
On this playing field of your mind you can develop enormous confidence
and courage. If there is anything consistent with all of the super-salespeople
in the world, it is that they do have confidence they can succeed. They put
this confidence into action with courage.
If you’re going to be a successful closer, you’ve got to mentally see
yourself as a closer before you physically close the order. You write the
order in your mind when you first get out of bed every morning. You start
writing and you continue to write those orders in your mind all day long.
The professional salesperson is observing, thinking, selling, and closing all
the time. Closing becomes a part of him. He burns it into his subconscious
mind. On every sales interview he projects successful results so that
inevitably the end results are a foregone conclusion.

Just in case you think I overstate the importance of making the sale in
your mind before you see the prospect, let me point out that a study done by
S.M.E.I. (Sales and Marketing Executives International) revealed that the
number one reason salesmen fail is their tendency to prejudge the prospect
and decide in advance that he might not or even will not buy. As I stated
earlier, you should prejudge the prospect, find him guilty, and convict him
of buying before you see him.
I’m not certain the salesperson in the next story “saw us coming,” but
based on the way she handled the transaction, I’m convinced she “tries and
convicts” every prospect who walks into her department and “sentences”
them to buy.

The “Neiman-Marcus” Close
Several years ago the Redhead and I were at a department store doing
some Christmas shopping. We rode the escalator to the mezzanine floor,
and as we stepped off, we saw a beautiful fur coat on a mannequin. I looked
at the fur and at the Redhead. She looked at the fur and at me. Both of us
knew without either one of us saying a word that we were looking at her
coat. We both stopped at the same time to give it a good once-over. I looked
at one part of the coat and she looked at another part. I’ll bet most of my
readers can tell me which part each one us of examined. The Redhead
grabbed the sleeve and looked at the price tag. I unbuttoned the coat, looked
at the lining, felt the fur, and said, “Sweetheart, this is magnificent.” By
then she had seen the price and said, “It ought to be!” And with that, she
turned around to walk away.
When she turned around she literally bumped into one of the sharpest
salesladies I’ve ever seen anywhere. She was a short, pleasant, grandmotherly type whom you would instantly like and trust. She looked right at
my wife and with a twinkle in her eye said, “Honey, that is a beautiful coat,
isn’t it?” Sugar Baby: “It ought to be!” Saleslady: “Well, you apparently
only looked at the price tag. Let me show you what you should have looked
at.” Very quickly she took physical action (I cover the Physical Action Key
in selling in chapter 32) as she opened the coat and said, “Look at the Eliot
label. When you see that name, especially when combined with our
reputation, it means quality and satisfaction. This coat will be with you a

long time, and it will be beautiful and practical every day you wear it.”
Then smoothly and easily she slipped the coat off the mannequin as she
said, “Let’s try it on, just for size.” (Now she is physically getting my wife
completely involved.)
The Redhead (protesting ever so mildly) slipped the coat on and the
saleslady asked, “How does it feel?” Sugar Baby: “Well, it feels good, but it
ought to!” (She’s still thinking about the price.) Then the saleslady did
something which was truly beautiful and professional as she said, “Well,
honey, what you ought to do [and she didn’t have a pad to talk with in this
situation] is take that price tag and divide by ten. You will wear that coat
five or six years and then your husband will probably have a clutch cape or
jacket made from it and you’ll wear the new garment another five or six
years. Actually, you can wear this beautiful fur for less than a cloth coat
would cost, since you would have to buy a cloth one every three or four
years. And,” she said, “honey, this is quality, and on you it looks natural.”
(Love that word in this situation!)

Pressure? Sure—but So Gentle It Felt Good!
Then she looked right at my wife and then at me. As she took her eyes
off my wife to look at me, she glanced back and caught my wife gently
stroking the fur. When she saw this she broke out in the biggest grin you’ve
ever seen. She knew, and she knew that she knew, she had the sale. (Despite
her verbal protests, my wife’s body language—which cannot lie—had
revealed her true feelings.)
She looked back at my wife and said, “You know, honey, you’re one of
the lucky ones. There are an amazing number of wives who come in here
and drool over a coat like this. Unfortunately, their husbands are not cut
from the same cloth as yours [I hadn’t said a word, but apparently my body
language had also given me away] and are unwilling to get something this
nice for their wives.”
Guess who left with a coat? That’s exactly right! That dear lady had put
me on such a high pedestal I just couldn’t let her down, could I? It wasn’t
too hard to convince the Redhead that she should “let me get it for her.”

Does It Work?

Even though the entire transaction lasted less than five minutes, there
were several important principles involved.
Number one, the salesperson was alert, on her toes, and in love with her
job. She observed the little twenty-second drama that took place as my
Redhead looked at the price and I looked at the fur. She might have heard
me comment on the coat, but I can’t definitely state that she did.
Number two, she immediately got my wife physically involved (she saw
that I was sold, so she figured it was one down, one to go!). Number three,
she knew my wife really wanted the coat but apparently didn’t feel it was
practical. Number four, she broke the cost down on a “reduction to the
ridiculous” approach so both of us could see it was practical and affordable.
She gave us a reason to buy (it was practical) and an excuse to buy (the
Redhead really did want the coat). One more time. Any time you can give a
prospect an excuse and a reason for buying, and make it easy for him or her
to buy, the odds are great the sale is yours for the asking.

32
Selling and Courting
Run Parallel Paths
The second key in closing the sale is the “Key of the Assumptive Attitude.”
As a starting point for this key, let me suggest that selling and courting run
parallel paths. For the ladies who read this, I apologize in advance because
this analogy won’t have as much value to you as it will have for the guys.
Actually, you are the ones who could write the book on this particular
subject. But, fellows, let me urge you to stay tuned in because I honestly
believe this will have considerable value for you.
I’m convinced that if you know anything at all about courting, you
already know a great deal about selling. Question for the guys: When you
were single and courting (or if you still are), did you ever ask your date,
“Honey, can I hold your hand?” “Do you mind if I put my arm around
you?” “Is it all right if I kiss you? Just one time, that’s all I want, just one
kiss?”
If you did or do court that way, chances are pretty good you are still
single. Next question: Did you ever kiss a girl? Chances are good if you are
a guy you answered in the affirmative, which means you kissed her without
permission.
Question for the distaff side: Did the suitor in the above example kiss you
without permission? Yes ______ No ______ Note: In a seminar situation,
when I ask this question the girls will invariably respond with a big,
laughing yes. At that point I playfully call them a bunch of liars and they all
laugh.

Actually, in most cases the guy probably had permission to kiss the girl
long before he took advantage of it. Chances are even better, however, that
the girl didn’t pucker up and say, “OK, partner, now plant it there!” That’s
not the way it’s done!
To tie this courting example directly to the sale of a product or service, I
can guarantee you that when you knock on a prospect’s door, whether it’s
his home or office, he’s not going to open the door and enthusiastically
proclaim, “Oh, thank goodness, you finally got here! I’ve been waiting for
one of your people to come by for years! Come on in! I’ll go get my
checkbook while you start writing the order!” You couldn’t pay the light
bill on the profits from prospects who “bought” like that.

In Selling and Courting You Assume and Imagine a Lot
Then how does the prospect say yes? Exactly the same way the girl said
yes. Fellows, did you ever try to hold hands with a girl and she said, “No!”
then a few minutes later you were walking down the street holding hands?
What she was saying initially was, “Based on the information you’ve given
me thus far, I can see no justification whatsoever in indulging in a
handholding exercise with you.”
Obviously, she didn’t verbalize that, but that’s what she was saying. By
her actions she was saying, “Now look, Charlie Brown, the night is young.
Be patient. Take your time—and SELL!” In selling we can sell more if we
transfer what we learn in the world of courting to the world of selling by
remembering that in the world of courting and in the world of selling, you
do a great deal of assuming and imagining.
In courting you assumed when you asked the girl for a date she was
going to say yes. You assumed if you treated her properly on the date, when
you got her to the front door you were going to get the good-night kiss.
However, you didn’t get her to the front door and say, “Honey, I’ll tell you
what. It’s getting late. Why don’t I stop by tomorrow afternoon at half-past
five on the way home and get my good-night kiss then?”

Here’s Why
There are two basic reasons you would not do this: Number one, you are
“motivated” by being with your date and you’ve spent an entire evening
hoping to get her in the same condition. To bid her good night at that point
would negate the effort you had expended for that evening. The second
reason is you know that the next day you would have to start all over. As a
matter of fact, after thinking about it overnight, you might be further behind
than you were when you started the day before, because your date might
have had second thoughts about granting that good-night kiss.
There are a lot of guys and gals in the world of selling who make that
mistake in the sales process. After making the full presentation and going
through the demonstration, completely establishing value and covering all
the sales bases, when the prospect brings up one lousy little objection or
excuse, the salesman often panics, backs away, and says, “OK, I’ll see you
tomorrow or next week or next month.”
Let me tell you something, my selling friend. In the world of courting
and in the world of selling, you must assume from the beginning when you
approach the prospect he’s going to be delighted to talk to you. You assume
you’re going to get the appointment. You assume you’re going to put on a
powerful, professional presentation. You assume he’s got the money to buy
and you assume he is going to buy from you now. From “hello” to “goodbye,” in courting and in selling, if you assume a lot you will sell a lot.
You should see the prospect signing the order and transferring a portion
of his monetary resources to your estate. You should see in your own mind
the transfer of your goods or services to him. In every step of the sales
process you assume and see the desired end results.

Visualize and Assume
Selling and courtship do run parallel paths. You guys undoubtedly
remember when you were young and single and first started dating. You
vividly remember exactly what you planned to say when you approached
that pretty little girl about going out with you. You rehearsed it in your mind
a thousand times and changed your “sales talk” just as often. However, in
your excitement and enthusiasm you visualized her nodding and agreeing

after a slight demurral that, yes, she would honor you with her presence that
evening.
You remember, fellows, how you planned exactly what you were going
to wear and exactly what you were going to say when you picked her up. In
your mind you vividly painted the picture a thousand times as to how she
was going to be dressed, how she would greet you when you arrived for the
big occasion. You drew the picture of that initial little squeeze when you
extended your hand to her, and how she would smile and say she was glad
you had gotten there. You clearly saw yourself opening the front door for
her and chatting as you walked out to the car and then opening that door for
her.
You had already carefully planned where you were going to go and what
you were going to do. You planned, or should I say “plotted,” how you were
going to stretch after you were seated in the theater and let your arm kind of
“naturally” end up on the back of her chair and ultimately, “accidentally,”
end up on her shoulder. Then you were going to pat her a couple of times
and leave your arm there (you clever rascal!).
You carefully planned how you would stop for a Coke, an ice-cream
sundae, or a pizza after the movie. You visualized the slow drive back to her
home and, yes, you visualized, as a result of all your graciousness,
wonderful conversation, sparkling personality, enthusiastic appreciation of
her, and all the other good things, that you were going to be able to—maybe
—on that first date, get a good-night kiss. Yep. You planned it all. You
visualized it all. You could see it happen. You were on a very important
sales call.

You, Too, Girls
And, girls, with few exceptions you were doing the same thing from your
side of the fence (on occasion you do go out with a guy because you have
no “better” or “other” offer and going out with Charlie Schmo beats
watching TV). For the guy who made your pulse beat faster, you did a little
subtle maneuvering as to how you could regularly, “accidentally,” be at the
same place as your dream guy. You carefully planned exactly what you
would say when he asked you out. Then you visualized what you were
going to wear and how you would greet him. You visualized how you

would respond when he “accidentally” found his arm around your
shoulders. You visualized how you would plant those subtle little hints and
suggestions through all of the little maneuvers you girls learned at the knees
of your mothers. Actually, it’s a sales process for the boy and the girl, with
the girl being more adept because she, from an early age, learned to think as
both a buyer and a seller.

Just Keep It Up
Question: Now that you’re selling products, goods, or services, why
don’t you follow identically the same procedure? Oh, I understand the
prospect will not be quite as cooperative as the girl and will certainly not
“plot” to aid you in your sales effort. However, need I remind you if what
you sell solves a problem or fills a need for him, then he, like the girl, is just
as interested as you are in “getting acquainted” with that solution. If you
really believe the sales process is something you do for a prospect and not
to the prospect, and if your sales technique is as sound and as carefully
planned as your courtship process, then more and more of the prospects will
enter into the process I discuss.
Now let’s take the courtship process (as in boy/girl) and translate it into
the sales process (salesperson/prospect). In the sales process you need to
clearly visualize, memorize, drill, and rehearse exactly what you are going
to say in the initial approach. You need to visualize the prospect’s response.
If you are new in selling, the chances are excellent your company has
already given you the approach to use and the expected response of the
prospect.
In your mind you need to see the prospect responding with, “Yes, you can
make your presentation.” You need to visualize the presentation as you’re
going to make it as well as the response of the prospect. You need to see
him nodding and agreeing that, yes, he does have a problem and, yes, your
product will solve that problem. You need to visualize him enthusiastically
receiving the good news about the service you can render.
Yes, the sales process—like the courtship process—is a visualization
procedure. If you think the sales process through and apply the same
enthusiasm, imagination, and visualization that you applied on those first

few dates you had, I can assure you your sales results will substantially
improve.
Throughout the entire process, whether you are “selling” your date or
selling your prospect merchandise, you assume the ultimate end result.
That’s easy and natural in the courtship process, but apparently it has to be
relearned in the sales process.
Most proposals are not in the form of “Will you marry me?” and most
sales are not in response to “Will you give me an order?” The end results
are brought about by a far subtler assumptive approach. In courtship the
suitor, after he has made his presentation, drops little thoughts like, “When
we’re married we won’t have to be in so early,” or “Our children will be so
good looking,” or “One of the things I’m going to get you when we’re
married is ____________.” The list is endless but the phrases are all aimed
at the same target. They are assumptive closes.

The “Assumptive” Close Revisited
One of the most effective assumptive closes I’ve ever experienced
involved one of my pastors, the venerable Dr. W. A. Criswell.
In late 1981, some members of the church approached me about teaching
a particular Sunday school class known as the “Auditorium Class.”
This class was held in the main auditorium between the two Sunday
morning sermons. It was a large class and represented a significant
commitment on the teacher’s part. I had serious reservations about my
qualifications as a Bible teacher.
With this in mind, I expressed my gratitude to the church members for
the invitation but also expressed some of my doubts. I told them I would
give it careful consideration and would be much in prayer about it. They
told me this was the message they would deliver to the pastor.
The next day (I’ve never seen Uncle Sam so efficient) I received a letter
from our pastor thanking me for accepting the assignment and expressing
his confidence the class would be an outstanding success. That’s the
“Assumptive” Close, and in this case it worked to perfection because I
wasn’t about to say no to Dr. W. A. Criswell, especially since I really
wanted to say yes.

Point: Assume the prospect wants to buy because he probably does, then
assume he is going to buy and he probably will. The “Assumptive” Close
makes it easy for him to buy. As a professional, that’s your job.

The “Kreepy Krauly” Close
In the summer of 1983, Tom Brickman, an enthusiastic young Kreepy
Krauly salesman (you read it right!), came knocking on our door. I was
jogging, and as I passed in front of our house, I saw Tom and the Redhead
busily engaged in serious conversation, so I aborted my jogging for the day
to see what was going on. Tom quickly explained that the Kreepy Krauly
was a robot with only one moving part and he was demonstrating its
effectiveness in cleaning swimming pools.
A few questions, a little chitchat, and Tom had an appointment to clean
our pool. The key to getting the appointment was Tom’s enthusiasm and
sincerity, combined with a few well-placed questions: (1) Would I be
interested in a device that dramatically reduced algae buildup in my pool
while saving up to 50 percent on my pool chemicals? (2) Would I like to
have the cleanest pool in the neighborhood and spend less than ten minutes
a week in the process? Both questions produced the expected answers.
Tom brought a new Kreepy Krauly, so the assumption was clear that he
expected to leave it in our pool. He used a dialogue guaranteed to arouse
interest (“invented by an engineer from South Africa who grew tired of
cleaning his own pool or using ineffective devices.” The engineer part
assured the acceptance and credibility. The South Africa part and “just
being introduced in the Dallas area” gave it an aura of intrigue and snob
appeal. “Tired of cleaning his own pool” rang an empathy bell.). I give Tom
an A for opening effectiveness. Incidentally, he covered these points while
he was taking “Kreepy” out of the container.
During the demonstration, Tom talked about Kreepy almost as if it were a
person. He explained that we would soon regard Kreepy as a silent,
hardworking member of the family (a little corny, but Tom’s infectious grin
made it very effective). Throughout the demonstration, Tom was answering
questions and showing me exactly what to do to keep Kreepy functioning
effectively (assuming all the time). The single step that really stood out,
however, was the way he used the “Assumptive” Close:

Tom: “Best of all, Mr. Ziglar, we keep a permanent record of the shape
and dimensions of your pool so if, for any reason, Kreepy is not keeping all
of your pool clean, a telephone call to our service department will solve the
problem. Now let me make a sketch of the exact size and shape of the pool
so our service department can give you the best possible service” (this is a
completely natural assumptive close). He quickly drew a sketch, asking me
the dimensions as he drew. When he had finished he asked if it was
accurate. I assured him it was. Tom: “Mr. Ziglar, as you can see, Kreepy is
doing a thorough job on your pool and this one is new, but I’ll be glad to
take this one out and put in a brand-new one. Would you like for me to do
that?” Zig: “No, this one is fine” (I had bought). Tom: “Do you want to give
me a check or do you prefer to put it on a credit card?” (two of the
“Alternate of Choice” Closes in succession).

Remember Why They Buy or Give You the Kiss
At this time I’d like to share my own courtship experience with you— up
to a point. I learned very early in my courtship career that the girls I was
dating were not kissing me for my benefit. As soon as I realized they were
having fun, too, I started kissing more girls! (For what it’s worth, I never
kissed my wife until after we were married. Of course, she wasn’t my wife
until we got married, was she?)
As a salesperson you need to understand that nobody’s going to buy from
you so you can win a trip to Hawaii (oh, your mother might, but you can’t
make a career of selling to Mom); nobody’s going to buy from you so
you’ll win the new car; nobody’s going to buy from you so you’ll be
number one. People are going to buy from you because of the benefits to
them as a direct result of buying what you’re selling. So from “hello” to
“good-bye” you assume they’re going to buy from you now.

The “Smell Good” Close
The third key to help you close more sales is one which I desperately
hope you are already using. It’s one which I’m embarrassed to mention, but
painful experience and observation tell me I must. I’m talking about the
“Key of Physical Action.” It’s the first part of this key I’m embarrassed to
talk about.

The Key of Physical Action starts with physical cleanliness. You start
every selling day by taking a bath or shower (especially if you’re using this
new twenty-three-hour deodorant. The company which makes it figures
everybody’s entitled to some time to themselves!) After the bath or shower
you use a good deodorant. You need to smell good and you also need to
make certain you do not have halitosis. (Some people say that halitosis is
better than no breath at all, but don’t bet the family jewels that the prospect
would agree with that!)
It’s terribly difficult to offend people and influence them at the same time.
You should use a mint or some kind of breath freshener about every hour so
you do not offend the prospect. Physical action begins with physical
cleanliness.

No Bath—No Sale
In 1969 the company I represented and served as vice-president was
approached by an organization selling executive retreats and seminars. The
primary concept was that anyone who qualified to attend was a chief
executive officer of a company or earned in excess of a hundred thousand
dollars a year. The seminars featured lectures by outstanding people, and
each one was structured so there was a considerable amount of free time for
these executives to visit with each other for brainstorming and sharing of
ideas. The salesman who called on us wore an expensive tailor-made suit,
drove a luxury automobile, and wore a large diamond ring. He was
persuasive and articulate but he never came close to making the sale. His
body odor was so offensive that after a few minutes in a room with him we
simply could not tolerate the odor. The interview was terminated in short
order and the salesman missed the sale.
I’m not certain we would have bought under ideal circumstances, but we
were intrigued with the idea. The salesman never had a chance to make the
sale, even though his sales knowledge and basic procedures were excellent.
His preapproach was good. He knew something about us. He was

professional in his introductory remarks, was enthusiastic about his product,
and did many things right. His lack of personal hygiene completely
eliminated any chance of the sale.
On the other side of the coin, I have seen some salespeople go to the
other extreme. I have been in the company of some who used such an
overwhelming amount of an expensive aftershave or cologne that the odor
nearly knocked me over. Some of the ladies use entirely too much perfume
and/or makeup. Taste and judgment enter the picture. In this case, as in all
cases, I’m convinced that most salespeople who are guilty of halitosis,
B.O., or too much aftershave or perfume are simply careless and unaware of
what they’re doing. There is no excuse for this. Be aware—and you’ll sell
more.
P.S. To husbands, wives, or sales managers: If your mate or salesperson
is ever guilty of being “odor offensive,” you need to gently suggest that
something be done about it.

The “Proper Dress” Close
Physical action includes how you dress. There are no “set in concrete”
instructions on this one. The dress will vary according to the time of year,
section of the country, and product or service you sell. You start by dressing
within the structure of the industry and part of the country in which you
live. Obviously, an individual selling computers, securities, or estate
planning would dress differently from the salesman who sells feed and
fertilizer on a direct basis to the rural areas of the country.
As a speaker, I follow one rule which makes sense to me: I try to dress so
my audience does not notice what I’m wearing. If you leave one of my
presentations raving about that “beautiful suit he had on,” I believe I have
been improperly dressed. If you leave thinking to yourself, Gee, you would
think the guy could do better than that! then I have been improperly
dressed. In my judgment, I should dress so your focus is on my face and
what I’m saying rather than on the clothes I’m wearing. That’s a pretty
good guideline for you. If you are too elaborately dressed or too shabbily
dressed, you distract from your presentation. In the case of you ladies, if
you are seductively dressed, it’s going to cost you as a professional. You

will, perhaps, get extra attention, but it will not be the kind that leads to
more sales and the building of a sales career.

Get Help—It’s Available
Your dress is so critically important I urge you to do two things: First of
all, buy a book such as John T. Molloy’s Dress for Success or his New
Women’s Dress for Success. There are other books available on the subject
as well in which you will find many excellent guidelines.
Number two, make contact with a professional clothing salesman in a
good clothing store. Get to know him or her; seek his advice; work with
him on a wardrobe concept; make friends with him and encourage him to
keep you informed about any style changes or sales which will enable you
to dress more professionally.
The same advice obviously applies to ladies, but if anything, it is even
more important for you. Here’s why: There is a fine line between good taste
and being overdressed and an equally fine line between casual and careless,
gaudy and imaginative. Also, quality and style are not as clearly defined for
the female business professional as they are for the male. By all means, you
should make friends with sales professionals in several department stores
and specialty shops. Encourage them to keep you informed about sales and
style changes. This approach is to your advantage as well as to the
advantage of the salesperson from whom you are buying, but it is especially
to your advantage.
A study done by Edward Young of Emory University revealed that when
salesmen in a Montgomery, Alabama, men’s store wore suits, the average
value of their sales was 43 percent higher than when they wore shirtsleeves
and ties, and 60 percent higher than when they wore open-collar shirts.
The old cliché is still true: You never have but one chance to make a first
impression. You want to make certain that first impression is a good one. It
is true you don’t judge a book by its cover, but if the cover isn’t appealing,
you probably won’t bother to find out what the book is all about.
If you’re selling a legitimate product or service at a legitimate price, you
need to concentrate on being dressed so you “blend” rather than “offend.”
You will also want to remember that the people you go to for advice

(doctors, attorneys, C.P.A.s, ministers, bankers, financial consultants, etc.)
are generally neatly and conservatively dressed. As a matter of fact, how
would you feel about their credibility if they were wildly or sloppily
dressed? Would you take them or their advice as seriously? Point: If you
want your prospects to take your advice (“Buy my product”), you should
dress as an adviser.
You have probably noticed that on several different occasions I have
suggested you “look your prospect in the eye.” You can’t do this very
effectively if you are wearing dark glasses. The statement “I don’t trust a
man who won’t look me in the eye” has been ingrained in most of us. With
our ever-increasing drinking and drug problems, the average person wants
to see “the whites of the eyes” of any salesperson who is trying to persuade
him to take action and buy something. On unusually bright days, tinted
glasses are fine while you are outside a building with your prospect, but
once you sit down at the negotiating table, those glasses must come off if
you are to be most effective.

In Gold and Selling, Position Is Important
Physical action, according to sales consultant Donald Moine, includes
establishing trust by reflecting the customer’s personality. If the customer
talks fast, the salesman will increase his own conversational speed. If he
talks in a whisper, the salesman’s voice will quickly drop to a whisper. “His
voice and manner say, ‘I’m like you. You’re safe. You can trust me,’ ” says
Moine.
Physical action also means being physically in position to sell. If you’re
selling a high-ticket item, if it’s humanly possible to have your prospect
seated, then by all means do so. Psychologically, your prospect will be more
comfortable making a decision when he’s seated than when he’s standing.
When the decision involves a substantial sum of money, you want
everything going for you.
Physical action means having the right seating arrangement. For
example, if you (the salesman) are calling on a man and his wife, you
should be next to the wife or in front of both of them. Every time you speak
to the husband, you should have to look past the wife or at the wife in the
process. Now if it’s true the husband is the head of the family, it’s just as

true the wife is the neck. Since the neck is what turns the head, you want to
make certain she is in a position to turn it properly.
This procedure has another advantage. By including the wife in the
complete presentation, you are covering one more sales base. On many
occasions a salesperson will have a tendency to do most of the talking to the
team member who is giving him the responses he wants and needs.
Generally speaking, this is the one who is most enthusiastic and who is
agreeing more with the salesperson. The problem with this procedure is
many times this “agreeing” prospect has little or nothing to do with the
decision. By including both husband and wife in the presentation, as this
physical action step will do, you are touching one more sales base which
gives you a better chance of making the sale, which I repeat is the purpose
of the call.

Those Jealous Hearts
In a sales presentation you should be careful not to get too close to the
prospect’s wife. He might be a jealous man, and if you either deliberately or
accidentally touch the wife, the prospect might think you’re trying to sell
something other than merchandise. I can guarantee you under those
circumstances you’re not going to sell him anything.
Incidentally, age does not enter the picture in this particular situation.
Whether the wife is twenty-five or seventy-five makes little or no difference
to a jealous husband. The one exception to this might be the man who is
married to a wife much younger than he is. In this case, he would be
inclined to be even more protective and more jealous.
The same advice goes to ladies. We’re in a society which is more open
today than ever before, but that does not eliminate the fact there are many
women who are protective and very jealous of their husbands. To have a
salesperson use her sex appeal to try to persuade the husband to buy
something is not going to endear that person to the wife. In many cases it
will cost you a sale and you’ll never know why. All of this simply says use
good judgment—be careful of where and how you sit and physically deal
with your prospects.
Remember, even if one member of the team, whether it’s a business team
or a husband-wife team, is a dominating one and is the primary decision

maker in most cases, the other member, as sales trainer Don Hutson says,
can still veto the sale. Don’t take that foolish and unnecessary chance.
When you deal with two or more prospects in an office or at a restaurant,
be careful not to sit between them or you will either look, act, and feel like
a referee at a tennis match or you will give one prospect more attention than
the other. If you are talking to the “boss” in the office and he is hidden
behind his desk, it will be difficult to communicate with him, especially if
you work with visual aids or a prospectus. In these cases, according to John
Hammond, you need to get permission to move a chair to the side of the
desk. Here’s how: “Mr. Prospect, I have some things I need to tell you as
well as show you. To do that I need to move this chair to the side of the
desk. Will that be all right with you?”
If you work in a specialty shop or a small store, it is almost always good
strategy to move from behind the counter and get on the prospect’s side.
This eliminates a “barrier” and helps to establish trust. Two exceptions to
this procedure occur when the shop is busy with customers or your prospect
is still in the selection process and you need to take additional items from
the display case.
If you are in direct sales, if it is humanly possible (without making an
issue of it) to get the prospect seated at the kitchen or breakfast-nook table,
you are in the ideal spot to sell. There is something about sitting at the table
where bread is broken that makes the prospect more responsive. Generally
speaking, most people invite company to visit in the living room; friends
and acquaintances visit in the den; and family sits down at the kitchen table.
When you sit at that kitchen table, you become, in the prospect’s
subconscious mind, a member of the family. And we do trust our family,
don’t we? We also buy from those we trust, don’t we?

Physical Action Should Put Prospect at Ease
Physical action means your samples are clean, well cared for, and in good
order. Physical action means that in the beginning of the interview
(primarily in direct sales) you have your order pad in plain view with your
presentation book.
In the case of a real estate presentation, I urge you to have the legal
document which you fill in to complete the sale in plain view on the front

seat of your car. As you get into the car, hand the husband and wife a copy
of the sales form and say, “In our city and state, this is the standard
agreement which we use. During our drive to the various properties, you
might want to glance through this and see if there are questions which you
need to ask.”
This is a simple way of getting the agreement into the prospects’ hands
and, more importantly, putting them at ease as you drive to the homes. It
gives them a chance to look it over and is handled in such a matter-of-fact,
nonthreatening manner it eases the closing process.
Instead of coming across as a “pressure” sales approach, it presents you,
in the prospect’s mind, as somebody who wants him to have all of the
information so he can make a good, sound decision. If there are any
questions, he obviously wants them answered, and this approach showcases
you as one who is willing to answer.
Physical action also means letting your product “sell itself.” The next
story by Janet Corning, taken from Cheer, a monthly publication of Realtor
Larry Fargher and Realcom Associates of Santa Clara, California, illustrates
the point beautifully.
The Best Salesman Ever
Shortly after Christmas I almost stumbled over a little boy in the middle of the sidewalk
who was so busy playing with a toy computer-controlled spaceship and a walking man
that he was oblivious to the crowd milling around him. His obvious pleasure made me
think the same toys would delight my own youngsters. I asked the little boy where he got
them.
“In there,” he said, pointing to a shop behind him.
I went in and asked for the toys the small boy was playing with. “Who is he?” I
remarked, as the proprietor wrapped my purchases.

She smiled. “You might say he’s my Christmas present. A few days ago he came in and
stood, staring longingly at the spaceship. ‘Would you like it for Christmas?’ I asked.
“ ‘Mother says there isn’t any money for Christmas this year. We lost Dad last spring,’
he explained, and turned to go.
“It had been a lean season for me, but it was a week before Christmas. I gave him the
spaceship, and he was so delighted that he got no farther than the sidewalk before he sat
down and inserted the batteries.
“Then the most amazing thing happened. People stopped to talk to him, and I’ve never
had so many customers. I kept count of the spaceships I sold and when he got up to go I
called him in and gave him a commission. I asked him to come back the next day and
added the walking man to his playthings. Yesterday his commission amounted to twelve
dollars!”

The story is a very good example of my often-repeated philosophy, you
can have everything you want in life if you will just help enough other
people get what they want. It also makes a pretty good point for generosity,
“going the extra mile,” “having a heart,” investing in sales promotion, etc. I
hope it’s not necessary to remind you that the little guy was “the best
salesman ever” because of his obvious ecstasy and sheer delight with the
toys (products) he was playing with (demonstrating). He believed in his
product, and even though he had no idea as to what a sales technique might
be, he “sold” very effectively because he transferred his feelings to the
prospects.

33
The “Look and Listen” Close
Physical action means you physically listen to what the prospect is saying,
not just with your ears but with your eyes as well. You do this by observing
him. Physical action comes from watching what your prospects are
physically doing. For example, a prospect might say no but is busy stroking
the back of the chair. His mouth says no, but his body language says maybe:
“This is really nice,” “Tell me more,” or even “I’m interested and will buy
if you will go ahead and close the sale.”
When this happens just remember a prospect can lie with his mouth but
he can’t lie with his body. For example, you are showing a home and the
prospect keeps giving objections such as, “It’s too expensive, don’t like the
corner lot, too far out of town,” etc., but all the time he’s standing looking at
the beautiful neighborhood or gazing out a back window at the view,
admiring the master bedroom or the kitchen cabinets. If he walks back to
take one more look at anything, you can be assured that in his mind he is
buying the property. You’re in an excellent position to sell. The body
doesn’t lie and that’s just one of the reasons you should learn to lean
forward with the complete expectancy of making the sale when you ask for
the order.
When the prospect for the automobile says he would never pay twenty
thousand dollars for an automobile but is stroking the upholstery or looking
at the performance figures, then you need to understand what his mouth is
saying and what his body is saying are two entirely different things. One
more time: He can lie with his mouth; he can’t lie with his body.

When a prospect says no with his mouth but ends a sentence with a but,
you know you’ve got a prospect. “No, I don’t think so, but this really is
nice.” If you are tuned in to what he’s doing by watching his body
language, you’re going to be able to persuade more prospects to take action
—now.
The fourth key in closing the sale is the “Key of Enthusiasm.” This key,
along with the Key of Persistence, is the most misunderstood key of them
all. Many people think that enthusiasm means you’re loud. Obviously, you
can be enthusiastic and loud, but in its truest sense, enthusiasm has nothing
to do with being loud. Enthusiasm comes from the two Greek words en
theos and literally means “God within.” Look at the last four letters in
enthusiasm. They are I A S M and are an acrostic for “I Am Sold Myself.”
If you are sold on the product, goods, or services you sell, then you are
going to be enthusiastic as you make your presentation and close.

The “Enthusiasm” Close
Enthusiasm sells. As I have said from the beginning, we sell because we
transfer the feelings we have for what we’re selling to our prospects.
Sometimes—and I need to warn you about this—too much enthusiasm can
cost you a sale. However, if I’m going to miss a sale I prefer to miss it on
the positive side rather than on the negative side. I also believe that for
every sale you miss because you’re too enthusiastic you will miss a hundred
because you’re not enthusiastic enough. With odds like that I’ll stay with
the enthusiasm.
I have no earthly idea as to why this is true, but there are some people
who misunderstand what enthusiasm really is. They equate enthusiasm with
pressure or an overpowering compulsion on the part of the salesperson. The
prospect might feel that because you’re enthusiastic you’re trying to
dominate or force your feelings, beliefs, and product on him, and therefore
he rebels or resists. I emphasize, this doesn’t happen often, but it does

happen. But I still feel if I’m going to miss, I’d rather miss because I’m too
enthusiastic rather than because I’m not enthusiastic enough.

This Is a Lotta Bull
With an abundance of enthusiasm, you might be just like this young
fellow down home whose enthusiasm caused him to miss. Here’s the
situation: It was courting night and he was running late. He knew if he was
too late his girlfriend would not go out with him. This was in the days
before everybody had automobiles and he was one who didn’t, so he had a
choice to make. If he walked all the way around a large pasture which
separated him from his girlfriend, he’d be so late she wouldn’t go out with
him. If he took a shortcut across the pasture, he might never get there,
because in the pasture was twelve hundred pounds of BIG, BAD BULL.
It was a difficult decision but he decided the prize was worth the risk, so
he took the shortcut across the pasture. He didn’t want to go too fast and
attract too much attention, but he didn’t want to stay there any longer than
was absolutely necessary—so he was running at a slow trot. All of a sudden
he heard the thundering hoofbeats of twelve hundred pounds of BIG, BAD
—and now very MAD—BULL! Our hero shifted into high gear and was
doing the hundred in about 6:4, but the bull was doing it in about 4:7. It was
a losing situation and the bull was picking up speed with every step.
Our hero knew he’d never make it to the other side of the pasture, so he
desperately looked around for a means of escape. Halfway between him and
the other side was a big tree. The tree had only one limb on it and it was
twenty-two feet off the ground. Our hero shifted into higher gear; the bull
was gathering steam and gaining ground with every step he was taking. As
a matter of fact, he could literally feel the bull breath on his heels. Now I
don’t know if you have ever felt bull breath or not, but it’s got to rate as one
of the most awesome, frightening, fearful feelings of all time!
At the last moment, when it appeared he was going to be gored and
trampled, he got within jumping distance of the tree, so he made a desperate
leap for that limb—but he missed it! Fortunately, however, he caught it
coming down!

If You’re Gonna Miss—Make It a Positive One

I’m almost certain that on occasion you’ll make a desperate effort for a
sale—and miss it. If you do miss, it’s better to miss on the positive side
because you might still make that sale—coming down.

Enthusiasm sells. Chances are excellent that on at least one occasion this
last month you’ve had eggs for breakfast. The odds are even better you ate
hen eggs instead of duck eggs, despite the fact that duck eggs taste better
and are more nutritious. One reason you didn’t eat duck eggs is probably
that they were unavailable.
The reason they were unavailable is a lack of enthusiasm and no
organized sales presentation on the part of the duck. When a duck lays an
egg, her entire sales presentation is wrapped up in one short “quack,” and
off she waddles. End of sales talk! Now when a hen lays an egg, she tells
the whole world what she’s done in a highly motivated and enthusiastic
manner. No wonder we eat duck eggs by the dozen and hen eggs by the
billions.
Enthusiasm sells—but enthusiasm without direction is like running in the
dark. That’s the reason I sell enthusiasm enthusiastically but I sell
knowledge, procedure, and technique even more enthusiastically—because
those skills will increase your enthusiasm, which increases your
effectiveness.
I don’t believe this book will have a single reader who hasn’t on occasion
bought something and later had a friend or relative ask why. The response
invariably is, “It’s a marvelous product!” The questioner will insist on more
of an answer. “What will it do?” Chances are good you’ve said, “A lot of

things.” The questioner persists, “Name one.” And suddenly it dawns on
you that you can’t really name any specific benefit you received by buying
the product, goods, or service. What happened was simple. You bought an
enthusiastic salesperson. You bought the idea and the feeling this other
person had for the product. You bought his belief in this product. You were
sold because the salesperson was sold. It’s true. Enthusiasm sells.
Yes, there are over a hundred closes in Secrets of Closing the Sale, but I
fervently believe an enthusiastic salesperson who passionately believes in
his product is going to sell more if he uses only a few of them than the
salesman who knows all of them but who is not enthusiastic in his
presentation of these closes.

Ask—and You Shall Receive
The fifth key in persuading people to take action is the “Key of the
Subordinate Question.” A subordinate question is any question the answer
to which, if positive, means the prospect has bought. If it is not positive, it
does not mean he has not bought. My friend Hal Krause used this
subordinate question as he headed into the close. “Well, Mr. Prospect, have
you sold yourself or should I tell you more?” Two points: Never ask, “Have
I got you sold?” People don’t want you to sell them anything. They’ll be
pleased and even delighted to buy if they have sold themselves. The
framework of the question is important because prospects don’t want you to
sell them anything.
The answer to the question makes you a winner, regardless. If the
prospect says, “Well, no, I’m sold,” then you write the order. On the other
hand, if he says, “No, I’m not quite sold; maybe you should tell me more,”
that’s really all any good salesperson wants—a chance to tell his story. This
approach provides you with that chance.
Many years ago I was scheduled to speak in Greenville, South Carolina. I
had written for a hotel reservation. I assumed I had one, but when I walked
into the lobby of the Holiday Inn, I knew I was in trouble. A sign at the
back of the lobby read, “Traveling Men—Avoid Greenville, South Carolina,
the week of October 11 through 15. It’s Textile Week.”

During that week you cannot get a room within fifty miles of Greenville.
Rooms are booked from one year to the next. Nevertheless, I walked up to
the counter, reached for the room registration, and boldly said to the clerk,
“My name is Zig Ziglar. Would you check my mail, please?” The lady was
not impressed. She asked: “Do you have a reservation?” Zig: “I certainly
have—or at least I wrote for one.” Clerk: “When?” Zig: “A long time ago.”
Clerk: “How long?” Zig: “Oh, it was three weeks—and would you please
see if I’ve had any phone calls?” Clerk: “Mr. Ziglar, I might as well tell you
—”
Zig (interrupting her): “Now just a minute, ma’am,” and about that time
another lady stepped out from behind the counter. The first clerk was
apparently new on the job, so with some relief she turned to the second one
and said, “This is Miss Fortune and she will help you.” I looked at Miss
Fortune, grinned, and said, “She doesn’t look like ‘misfortune’ to me; she
looks like good news all the way!”

The “Presidential” Close
She smiled good-naturedly and said, “Mr. Ziglar, ordinarily I am good
news, but tonight—” I interrupted, “Just a minute, ma’am, don’t say another
word. I’ve got to ask you two questions.” Miss Fortune: “OK.” Zig:
“Question number one: Do you consider yourself an honest woman?” Miss
Fortune: “I certainly do!” Zig: “OK, question number two: If the president
of the United States were to walk through the door and come up to you and
say, ‘I want a room,’ now tell me the truth, would you have one for him?”
She smiled and said, “Now, Mr. Ziglar, you and I both know that if the
president of the United States were to come in here, I’d have a room for
him.” Zig: “OK, ma’am, you’re an honest woman and I’m an honest man.
You can take my word for it. The president of the United States is not going
to come through that door. I’ll take his room!” I slept there that night—not
because of what I told her but because of what I asked her.

As an interesting aside, the organization I was speaking for that evening
had tried to get me a room and had failed, despite the fact that the secretary
to the innkeeper was the wife of the man for whose organization I was
speaking. The point is simple: The use of questions often leads to the sale.
I used this identical procedure to get a room at the Royal Sonesta Hotel
in New Orleans. My wife and I, at the last moment, decided we wanted to
celebrate one of our anniversaries in New Orleans, but everything was
booked. I phoned, used this procedure on the manager, and got the room. It
works!
Question: Will it work for you?
Answer: I can’t say with certainty it will, but Larry Nichols, who at that
time was the training manager for the Kirby Company of Cleveland, Ohio,
was pleased that it worked for him. Here is the situation: The Kirby
Company had a managers’ meeting scheduled at the Industry Hills Sheraton
in City of Industry, California, on July 21, 1983. Larry arrived late at night,
but when he attempted to check in the clerk told him he did not have a
reservation and there were no rooms available.
Larry is a person who believes if something works you shouldn’t fix it, so
he followed the procedure exactly as I had described it on the cassette
recording. When he asked the clerk if the president of the United States
walked in, would there be a room for him, a pleasant surprise was the result.
The clerk smiled broadly and told Larry he would not have a room for the
current president, but he would have one for the former president. “As a
matter of fact,” the clerk said, “we do have the Gerald and Betty Ford Suite
and they are not going to be using it, so it’s available for you.”
Two points: First, the procedure works. Larry had a nice place to stay.
Second, the clerk honestly had forgotten about that suite and Larry’s
questions jogged his memory. Need I remind you this procedure can be
adapted and slightly changed when you seek an item which is in short
supply, or when you need a service favor on a holiday or weekend?
My good friend and “brother” Bernie Lofchick instinctively answers
every question with a question. One time I asked, “Bernie, why do you
always answer questions with questions?” His response: “Well, why not?”

The “Three Question” Close

One of the simplest and most effective closes is the “Three Question”
Close, which you use after you have convinced your prospect that your
product or service will save money, time, work, etc. As an example, if
you’ve been demonstrating the money-saving feature, the three questions
are:
1. “Can you see where this would save you money?”
2. “Are you interested in saving money?” (Wait for answer.)
3. “If you were ever going to start saving money, when do you think
would be the best time to start?”
The last question ties it down and gets the decision. If you’ve done your
job and the prospect is honest, you just made a sale.
If you’re selling on health, you use the same three questions. “Can you
see where this would be better for your health?” “Are you interested in
better health?” “If you were ever going to start taking care of your health,
when do you think would be the best time to start?” On convenience: “Can
you see where this would save you some time and work?” “Are you
interested in saving time and work?” “If you were ever going to start saving
time and work, when do you think would be the best time to start?”
In our company everything we produce is essentially geared to improve
production in one form or another. When our sales representatives are
dealing with a salesperson, we teach them this adaptation of the “Three
Question” Close: “Can you see how using this sales training course would
increase your sales?” “Are you interested in increasing your sales?” “If you
were ever going to start increasing your sales, when do you think would be
the best time to start?” It’s effective.

The Minister “Sells,” Too
(The next example is taken directly from the inspiring book The Secret of
Supernatural Living by Dr. Adrian Rogers and is used with permission of
the Thomas Nelson Publishing Company.)
A man came to see me concerning his wife. She was suicidal, and he wanted me to
counsel with her. I said I would if he would come with her to my study. This man
worked in the space industry at Cape Kennedy and held an important position.

The wife poured out her story of a broken heart. She wept as she spoke of her husband’s
cruelty, infidelity, drunkenness, and gambling. I turned to him and asked, “Sir, are you a
Christian?” Mind you, I was not asking for information but turning the conversation
toward Christ.
He threw back his head and laughed scornfully. “No, I am an atheist,” he said.
“Well,” I responded, “an atheist is one who knows there is no God. Do you know all
there is to know?”
“Of course not,” he shot back.
“Would it be generous to say you know half of all there is to know?”
“Yes, that would be very generous,” he muttered.
“Then if you only know half of all there is to know, wouldn’t you have to admit the
possibility that God may exist in the body of knowledge you do not have?” I asked.
“I never thought of that,” he said. “Well, I am not an atheist, then. I am an agnostic.”
I said, “Now we are getting somewhere. Agnosticism means you don’t know.” (I didn’t
tell him that the Latin equivalent for agnostic is ignoramus.) “An agnostic is a doubter,” I
said.
“Well, that is what I am and a big one.”
“I don’t care what size as much as what kind. There are two kinds of doubters, you know
—honest and dishonest. The honest doubter doesn’t know, but he wants to know. The
dishonest doubter doesn’t know because he doesn’t want to know. He can’t find God for
the very same reason that a thief can’t find a policeman. Which kind of doubter are
you?” I asked.
His face softened. “I never really thought about it. I guess I never really wanted to
know,” he said.
“Did you know that there is a promise to the honest doubter in God’s Word?” I asked. I
then read to him the words of Jesus Who was speaking to the doubters of His day. “Jesus
answered them, and said, ‘My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will
do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of
myself’ ” (John 7:16, 17 [kjv]).
I continued, “In plain English that says that if a man will surrender his will completely,
God will reveal Himself to that man.” My friend was getting interested.
I then asked him, “Would you be willing to sign a statement like this: ‘God, I don’t know
whether You exist or not, but I want to know and because I want to know I will make an
honest investigation and because it is an honest investigation, I will follow the results of
that investigation wherever they lead me regardless of the cost.’ ”
After a time of soul-searching, he said, “Yes, I would be willing to sign a statement like
that. I will do it. How do I go about making such an investigation?”
We shared together, and I got him started reading the Gospel of John with the
commitment that he really wanted to know the truth and would follow any truth revealed
to him regardless of the personal cost or consequences.
In a matter of weeks, this same man came back to my study, got on his knees, and gave
his heart to Christ. That was many years ago. I had lost track of him until recently, when
I received a letter from him. He is now living in a northern state and is an excited
witness for Christ.

In his letter to me, he said, “Dear Friend, thank you for being willing to spend time with
this general in the devil’s army.”
Now where was this man’s real problem? It was not in his head as he first thought, but in
his heart. When he surrendered his will, faith followed. Unbelief reveals a wicked heart.

As you can see, Dr. Rogers asked seven questions which resulted in the
decision. He also dealt with the man’s head and his heart.
The next example is a case study on how to ask questions effectively to
lead even distraught prospects to a favorable decision.

Selling a Service
In 1982 and ’83, our daughter Julie worked for The Beneke Company as
the only female public insurance adjustor in the state of Texas. Her job was
essentially that of selling, so she and I took advantage of many
opportunities to discuss sales technique and procedure. I was thrilled with
her professionalism and the number of questions she developed to lead the
prospect to favorable and mutually advantageous decisions.
Obviously, the company training program provided her with many
techniques, procedures, and questions, but she generated some key ones on
her own. Her primary prospects were those who had suffered major losses
due to weather, fires, floods, or any other natural or man-made catastrophe.
Most of her clients and prospects had suffered losses from fires, and the
damage ranged from ten thousand to tens of thousands of dollars.
When Julie arrived for her “sales call,” the first question she always
asked was, “Did everyone get out OK?” Please understand that nearly 100
percent of the people she dealt with were emotionally upset. Not only are
fires hazardous to your health, but they are also messy and expensive. Many
times the victims had also lost personal items, irreplaceable keepsakes, and
family heirlooms. Their need for someone to share in their grief and give
them some measure of empathy and understanding was enormous. Julie’s
opening question demonstrated real concern for the victim and helped
create a favorable climate for the interview. That opening question also
brought the victim face-to-face with his good fortune in suffering only the
loss of “things” and not a loved one (she never had a client who suffered
that loss).

Establish Rapport—Then Ask Questions

Once the prospect had assured Julie that everyone was OK, she made a
few comments expressing her relief and her sincere regret for the property
loss. Once rapport had been established, Julie asked the second question:
“Have you ever had a major property loss before?” (Most of them had not.)
“Did you ever have a claim on a car wreck or damage?” If the answer was
affirmative, she would ask, “How did it go?” If the answer was
“Satisfactory,” she responded positively by saying, “Generally speaking, on
small losses the treatment is usually fair.” If the answer was negative, she
responded, “Then you are already familiar with how insurance company
adjustors work in order to minimize the settlement amount?” (Her voice
inflection made the statement a question.) She would generally wait for a
comment.
Julie: “Did you know you have a right to a professional representative
when you suffer a loss such as this?” Prospect: “No, I didn’t.” Julie: “Do
you understand, Mr. Prospect, that whether or not you want to be, right now
you are your own claims adjustor?” Prospect: “I hadn’t really thought about
it.” Julie: “Do you feel knowledgeable enough to negotiate with the expert
the insurance company will send out to adjust your loss?” Prospect:
“Probably not.” Julie: “Do you have as high a regard for your money, Mr.
Prospect, as the insurance company does for its money?” Prospect: “Yes, I
do.” Julie: “Do you realize they’re going to send out a professional to
protect their money?” Prospect: “I hadn’t thought about it in those terms.”
Julie: “Their claims adjustor is a professional, so do you think it would be
in your best interests to have a professional protecting your money?”
Prospect: “Yes, I probably should.” Julie: “You do understand that the
insurance company is not simply going to say, ‘Send us the bill and we’ll
pay it,’ don’t you?”
Each of these questions is designed to make the prospect think in terms
of using a professional because the insurance company is also going to have
a professional. This is not to imply that the insurance company wants to
cheat anyone or is going to be unfair. Realistically, the homeowner, in most
cases, does not understand his rights and in virtually every case forgets
many of the items which are destroyed in a fire.
Other questions Julie often asked: “Mr. Prospect, would it be a problem
for you and your wife to take time away from work and family to sift

through, sort out, write down, and price everything you lost in your home,
from the brooms in the utility room closet to the number of socks in your
drawers?” Prospect: “Yes, it would.” Julie: “Would it be convenient for you
to meet with the adjustor, restoration people, dry cleaners, and others who
need access to your home and belongings?” Prospect: “That depends on
when and where.” Julie: “In a court of law you have an attorney to represent
you, and in front of the IRS you have a C.P.A. to plead your case. Doesn’t it
make sense that you would do better to have a professional adjustor plead
your case in this loss?” Prospect: “Sounds reasonable.”
Julie: “When you get down to negotiating the loss, will you feel
comfortable the figures being presented are just and fair to you?” Prospect:
“I’m not sure.” Julie: “Mr. Prospect, did you know that our average
increase, after the insurance company’s first offer, is thirty percent?”
Prospect: “No.” Julie: “Mr. Prospect, our fee is only ten percent, so you still
realize an additional two hundred dollars per one thousand dollars by
making the right decision to hire a professional. In simple terms, on a loss
of twenty thousand dollars this will bring you four thousand dollars extra;
on fifty thousand dollars it would be an extra ten thousand, which is in
reality your money, which you will need to rebuild and replace your loss.
These figures are net to you, after our fee. Does that extra money—which is
yours—appeal to you, Mr. Prospect?” Prospect: “It sure does!”
Julie: “The exciting fact, Mr. Prospect, is that we guarantee our work. If
we don’t secure a settlement large enough to cover your repairs and our fee,
there will be no fee. In other words, Mr. Prospect, there’s no way you can
lose. Is that the kind of situation you’d like to participate in, Mr. Prospect?”
Prospect: “Yes, it is.” Julie: “Would you like for us to start working for you
today so you can move back into your home at the earliest possible
moment, or is there any particular hurry?” Prospect: “We don’t have a place
to live, so the sooner we can move back in, the better it will be.” Julie: “If
you will go ahead and OK this agreement, we can get the process started so
that despite the grief of the loss, you will not be faced with a financial
burden to go along with it. That is what you want, isn’t it, Mr. Prospect?”
Prospect: “Yes.”
If you count, you’ll discover that in the process she asked over a dozen
questions. Her results were excellent because the questions were designed

to lead that person to take the action step to solve his problem.

You Can—You Must—Learn to Ask Questions
Many times people ask me how they can learn to ask questions. The first
thing I’m going to tell you is obvious: Study—don’t just read—this book.
Take all of the questions (there are over eight hundred in this book) and
rephrase them so they relate directly to your business. Then record those
questions with the right voice inflection and listen repeatedly until they are
firmly embedded in your subconscious mind.
This will clarify your thinking to an amazing degree. It will enable you to
zero in on your target, which is to help crystallize your prospect’s thinking
which helps him in making the right decision. This is critical because your
success and the solution to his problem are ultimately dependent on his
making the right choice.
Additionally, you should learn how to ask questions by talking with the
top salespeople and sales trainers with your company or by asking other
salespeople who sell similar products. Ask them the specific questions they
use to (1) arouse interest, (2) sell benefits, (3) get appointments, (4) secure
prospects, (5) close the sale, (6) tie down the order, and (7) convey
conviction. Keep your eyes and ears open when you go out to shop or when
a salesperson comes calling on you.
Build a sales library and become a student of selling. Develop the power
to concentrate on one thing at a time. In this case that one thing is how to
ask questions. Any time you see or hear an effective sales question, write it
down in the question section of your sales notebook. Remember—the truly
professional salesperson always keeps his inner ear and his sixth sense
tuned in to good sales techniques. He has that true missionary zeal to learn
as much as he can so he can spread the word to as many people as possible
about his fantastic product or service.

The “Greatest Salesman” Close
Since I am often asked about sources for learning more about asking
questions, I’ll simply anticipate your question.
There is a manual available in every good bookstore which will be
enormously helpful to you in learning how to ask questions. The manual

you’ll want to pick up is called the Holy Bible. At this moment this has
nothing to do with religion, but any fair-minded person has got to admit that
the greatest salesman who ever lived was the carpenter from Galilee.
Get a red-letter edition (Christ’s words are in red), and you will discover
that every time somebody asked Jesus Christ a question He always
answered with a question or with a parable. So if you want to know how to
ask questions, that’s the place to learn! (Everything He said in the Bible can
be read in about three hours, so He was obviously going right at our hearts
with every word.)
He was also the greatest sales and marketing manager who ever lived. He
took just twelve salesmen—and one of them (Judas) was a loser—and
spread the Good News everywhere in short order.
Many times I’ve heard people say, “You know, I’ve read the Bible, but I
don’t understand it!” Personally, I don’t think it’s the part they don’t
understand that bothers them! Actually, the Bible is very, very clear. For
example, I’ll bet you’ve noticed He didn’t call the Ten Commandments the
“Ten Suggestions.”
As long as you are reading the Bible to learn how to ask questions, you
might as well read on and learn the answers. One of these days He’s going
to ask you a question, and if you get it right, you get to stay! My friend, that
will be the biggest sale you will ever make! You really should read your
Bible. Not only will it give you peace of mind now, but to tell you the truth,
it’ll help keep the heat off you later!

The “Dinner Out” Close
Questions are especially effective if you can tie customer benefits to the
question. The “customer” is the person who is buying the idea, concept,
goods, service, or product from you, whether it is a sale or a social
situation. Never will I forget one Friday evening when I returned from a
tough week on the road. The Redhead met me at the airport and she was
dressed to kill. As usual, she had on some of the good, sweet-smelling stuff
that I especially like.
As we were waiting for my bag to come down on the carousel, she
snuggled up real close, slipped her hand into mine (she’s powerful friendly,

anyhow!) and said, “Honey, I know it’s been a long, tough week for you, so
if you want to we can stop by the store on the way home and pick up a nice
steak or some seafood. While you relax with the paper I’ll prepare a nice
dinner for two. Tom is spending the night with Sam, so we’ll be by
ourselves. Then, honey, after we’ve had a nice dinner I’m certain you won’t
want to get involved in cleaning dirty dishes and greasy pots and pans, so
you can watch television while I take care of that.
“It shouldn’t take me more than an hour, hour and a half, two hours at the
most. [Pause] Or, the thought occurs to me, honey, that you might be more
comfortable and enjoy the evening more if I were completely free to devote
all of my time and energy to you. I could do this in a really nice restaurant.
Of course, honey, it’s entirely up to you. What do you prefer?” (And men
call women “the weaker sex”!)
I don’t really think it’s necessary to tell you we did not stop by the
grocery store or cook that dinner at home. That Redhead “sold” me by
asking questions. It is effective persuasion when you ask questions which
lead the prospect to a decision that is in his best interests.

34
Listen—Really Listen
The sixth key in closing sales is a very significant one. It is the “Key of
Listen.” Most salespeople do not really listen to everything the prospect is
saying or asking. Many times the salesperson interrupts the prospect and
attempts to anticipate what he is going to ask. Solomon covers this one in
the Book of Proverbs when he says, “He who answers before listening—
that is his folly and his shame” (see Proverbs 18:13). And when you listen
—listen. Don’t just “hear him out” so you can take the initiative and “say
something which is really important.” Chances are excellent if you really
hear what he says and what he is saying, he will give you the key to making
the sale.
An inexperienced or insecure salesperson is the one who asks the
question and answers it in the same breath. Example: “Can you see where
this would save you some money—of course you can!” “Can you see where
this would help you save some work—obviously you can.” The salesperson
is afraid he’s going to get the wrong answer and therefore he does not
permit the prospect to give him any answer. When you ask a question, listen
for the answer. It will give you the proper direction to close the sale.
If the prospect raises an objection, that’s great! As a matter of fact, any
good presentation should be designed—especially in the early part—to
bring out objections. The earlier you can deal with them the more likely you
are to close the sale.

Hear Everything—Register Some Things
You need to listen and hear everything, but when the prospect says no,
you don’t want to register it. Merlie Hoke, a good friend of mine from

South Carolina, worked with me for several years in the cookware business.
She had a peculiar hearing “problem.” I’ve seen a prospect from a distance
of three feet almost shout, “No, Merlie, I don’t want to buy!” Merlie
wouldn’t blink. She didn’t “hear” a word. I’ve also seen a prospect whisper
yes at thirty feet and Merlie clearly heard the good news. Merlie
understands that when a prospect says no he doesn’t really mean it. It’s only
when he says yes that she takes him seriously.

The “Hep ’Em Git It” Close
Merlie Hoke has a technique which is truly beautiful. As she starts to
close the sale, from her seated position in front of the couple she makes this
statement (as she moves her chair to the side of the lady): “Oh, this is so
beautiful . . . and you deserve it . . . and I’m gonna hep [that’s h-e-p] ya get
it.”
As I sat there watching this master saleslady at work, I got the distinct
feeling I was witnessing a conspiracy. It appeared that Merlie and the little
lady were going to gang up on that big old cookware company because
they’ve got thousands of sets of cookware and bless your heart, little lady,
you haven’t got even one! “And I’m gonna hep ya get it!”

Good Salespeople Help Prospects to Buy
I got the strong feeling that Merlie Hoke had become an assistant buyer.
She had moved to the customer’s side of the table and was interested only in
helping that customer own the set of cookware. Now obviously she was
going to be using the customer’s money. In all the years I worked with
Merlie, I never heard her say she “sold” anybody anything. She always said,
“I helped her get it,” or “I let her have it.”
In the final analysis, what we as professional salespeople want to do is
find people with a problem which our products, goods, or services will
solve. We want to become assistant buyers and move to their side of the
table. We want to feel their feelings so we can assist them in solving their
problem by acquiring our goods, products, or services.

Your careful preparation, sincere interest, and action expectancy will
determine to a large degree whether it’s a sale or an “I’ll let you know
later.”
Listen with Your Eyes. As we deal with our prospects we particularly
need to listen with our eyes. The eyes are the only sense organ connected
directly to the brain. Every other sense organ has to make a round trip
before it gets back to the brain, but the “eyes are the windows of the soul,”
and an impulse on the eye is transmitted directly to the brain. That could be
one of the reasons all of your life you’ve heard the two phrases “You can’t
believe everything you hear” and “I saw it with my own two eyes—and
seeing is believing.” With this in mind we definitely need to listen with our
ears and with our eyes.
Here’s a simple little formula for listening with your eyes: It’s called the
“CHEF Method” of listening. C stands for “chin” or “cheek.” When the
prospect begins to rub either his chin or cheek or holds either one in his
hand, it is a satisfaction/gratification sign. In his mind he’s already using
and enjoying the benefits of the goods or services you’re selling. It is a
buying signal, telling you that now is the time to close.
H is for “hands.” Watch your prospect’s hands. If he is gently massaging
palm against palm or palm against the back of the other hand, in his own
mind the prospect has already assumed ownership of whatever you are
selling. He’s telling you he is ready to buy.
E stands for “eyes.” Watch them. It’s a fact that the wider the eyes are
open the more intently he is listening, the more he’s understanding, and the
more he’s buying. To magnify this one a bit, many of the advertisements
you see today on television have been checked by the use of cameras. The
commercials are shown to a group of people who are never questioned
about their sentiments concerning the commercials. Instead, high-powered
cameras focus on the eyes of the individuals who are watching. The degree
of dilation of the prospect’s pupils determines whether or not that prospect
is really buying the idea in the commercial.
Interestingly enough, the prospect might say he loved the commercial,
but if the pupils are not dilating, the commercial is rejected. As I say, body
language doesn’t lie.

You also want to watch the prospect’s eyes as they begin to open wider. If
there are crow’s-feet and they begin to relax, you are getting your message
across—you’re communicating and selling. It’s a visual signal to close the
sale.
F stands for “friendly.” When the prospect smilingly uses such
statements as, “John, you dirty dog! Jesse James used a gun but you’re
using your pencil, trying to get my money!” he’s buying.
He is also probably calling you by your first name; he crosses his legs,
leans back, and relaxes. On the other hand, he may suddenly become quiet,
get up, and walk around the item without even speaking. He may get busy
looking at the item you offered or he simply might look out the window,
light a cigarette, or get a cup of coffee. Those are buying signals. Close the
sale.

Act on the Signals
As the prospect gives you these “buying signals” (a “visual” buying
signal is defined by John Hammond as anything the prospect does that
indicates he has accepted the product), you want to take advantage of them.
You do this by quietly asking questions. For some reason, according to Will
Rogers, people seem to listen more intently and believe more completely
anything which they hear in a low tone of voice or a whisper.
Obviously, you do not want to overlook these visual buying signals. The
prospect might, for example, ask you to go over exactly what he gets with
the purchase. Comments like, “I’ve never had this particular style [size,
model].” Questions like, “How long is the warranty?” “When would the
first payment be due?” “How much is the deposit?” “How long will it take
me to get delivery?” “What is your service policy?” “Where do we get
spare parts?” “Do you have a warranty?” “How much did you say the
deposit was?” “I’ve never used this brand.” “What do you think, dear?”
“What is the real rate of interest?” “How long would it take to get it
installed?”
Yes, the Key of Listen is a critically important key. The ability to be a
good listener is vitally important in communication. Many people will buy
primarily because you display an interest in them as individuals. They buy

because you listen to some of their hopes and ambitions and apply your
product or service benefits directly to them.

The Key of the Impending Event
The seventh key is the “Key of the Impending Event.” What is an
“impending event”? It’s something that is going to happen in the future and
has direct bearing on the price, performance, service, desirability, or
availability of the goods or services you are selling.
Almost without exception I can assure everyone who reads this book that
whatever they’re selling today will be more expensive tomorrow. There will
be some notable exceptions (computers, electronic devices, etc.), but by and
large things are going up. With this fact as a base, once we’ve committed
ourselves to serve our customers, we need to offer them the most goods at
the best price with the best possible service. Since price increases are
inevitable, if we can persuade our prospects to take action today, we will be
acting in our prospect’s best interests.

Actually, we have a moral obligation to acquire as much professional
expertise as possible to enable us to persuade more people to take action
today for their benefit. If we do help them (our prospects), then obviously
our sales will go up.
When I entered the world of selling, one of the first things my good
friend and sales manager, Bill Cranford, told me was that if I could
effectively deal with the “I’ll buy it later” stall, I would be successful in the
world of selling. Over the years I came to realize and appreciate the value
of that observation. I also saw convincing evidence as to why prospects
hesitated and wanted to “think it over.” They feared they would lose
financially or look foolish for having bought.
That’s the reason that, in the early pages of this book and on several other
occasions, I have pointed out that the salesperson is more important than
the sales process, though the process is certainly important. To repeat
myself, if you’re sincere about building a career and helping others, you

will protect your integrity at all costs while learning as much technique and
process as possible so you can more effectively persuade your prospects to
take action.
The Key of the Impending Event is a key you can use to help your
customers, which obviously means you’ll be helping yourself as well. This
is especially true when you’re selling a product to the customer that has
resale value and hence the prospect is investing for profit or investment
purposes. Typical, of course, are real estate, fine arts, securities,
commercial-grade diamonds, and stocks and bonds. Obviously, your sales
effort will be to convince the prospect that economic trends are such that
the investment he makes today will be worth more in the tomorrows of his
life.

The “Impending Event” Close
Here is an example of the “Impending Event” Close. Prospect: “The
price on this house is too high.” You: “Yes, I’d be inclined to agree with
you. The price on this home—like most everything else—is too high. But
you, Mr. Prospect, are the one who set the price.” Prospect: “What do you
mean, I set the price?” You: “Actually, it was you and all the other people
who are in the market for homes who really set the price of the homes. For
example, if 90 percent of the people who are in the market for a home were
to suddenly stop looking, I can assure you that in a matter of six months the
price of this house would be considerably less. However, everything
indicates more—and not fewer—buyers will soon be in the market for a
home, and the law of supply and demand sets the price.
“As you well know, real estate has consistently increased in price. It’s my
firm conviction that a year from now or ten years from now, should you
elect to sell this home, you will be able to get substantially more for it than
the current price. If you go ahead and invest in this home today, you will
profit from the impending increase in price brought about because of the
demand for homes created by you and thousands of others.”
Another Impending Event opportunity is the fact that anyone who lives
will have more birthdays and consequently they need to look at retirement
or taking care of their old age. Your prospect is going to want to enjoy some
good things in the future when he will not be working quite so hard. As an

example, if you’re selling a retirement home, beach, or lakeshore property,
the close could go like this: “Mr. Prospect, since you’ve been putting so
much into life for so long, don’t you think it’s time you prepare to let life
put something back in you? This property I’m talking about will do exactly
that.”

Don’t Let Them Dazzle You with Their Footwork
Mental alertness is a critical necessity if you expect to scale the sales
heights, so let’s take a little test to see if you’re with it. (It’s OK to figure in
the margins.) Here we go.
You’re a bus driver and you’re headed south with fifty-five passengers on
the first leg of your trip in your bus. You go four and four-tenths miles, then
you turn east in your bus on the second leg of your trip and you go three
and three-tenths miles. On the third leg of your trip in your bus you turn
back to the south and this time you drive your bus exactly two and twotenths miles. On the last leg of your trip in your bus you turn east and you
go exactly one and one-tenth miles.
On this trip you’ve driven your bus in two directions but you’ve made
three turns for the four different legs of your trip in your bus. You actually
drove 4.4 + 3.3 + 2.2 + 1.1 miles, which comes to exactly 11 miles.
Here’s the question (no fair looking back!): Based on the information
which I’ve just given you, please write the bus driver’s age in this blank
____________. (I repeat, it’s OK to figure in the margin.) Go ahead—
participate. Figure it out. That is the way we learn. You’ll find the answer
on the next page.

Don’t Let Them Lead You Astray
If you missed it, the chances are good you did because I dazzled you with
my verbal footwork. I kept you diverted by talking about unrelated items
such as “Turn east, south, and east again.” I talked about fifty-five
passengers, 4.4, 3.3, 2.2, 1.1 miles, etc. At this point, you’ve got to be
wondering, What does this have to do with closing a sale? Answer: A lot.
Many times when you’ve got the prospect motivated and interested in what
you’re selling, he suddenly realizes he is headed straight for a purchase and
it hits him that this purchase is not in the budget.

This is a problem. He fears he is now going to make a yes decision and
he’s not certain he should. His solution: Divert the salesperson’s attention
and thrust by talking about the presidential election, crime on our streets,
violence on television, etc. So what do you, the salesperson, do? Two
things: First, never lose sight of your objective, which is to make a sale.
Second, when the prospect changes the subject, you acknowledge the
change, comment briefly, and tie it to the diversion, for example, “Yes, the
presidential election is really exciting and so are the benefits which go with
our product or service.”
When I was a child I would occasionally see a bird that was apparently
injured, so I would try to catch it. However, as I made my move the bird
would struggle into the air and fly a few feet. Again I’d run after it and say,
“I’m going to catch that bird.” A little later and a mile away, Mama Bird
would take off and go back to the nest. What Mama Bird had done was led
me astray.
Message: Don’t let your prospects lead you astray by changing the
subject and leading you away from the issue at hand. Keep in mind that it
might be nice to talk about other things, but you don’t help anybody unless
you can leave that prospect with a solution to the problem he has. Your
goods or services should offer that solution.
Answer: Did you put your own age in the blank? If you didn’t, please
prepare to be a little embarrassed, because I told you twenty-four times,
“You’re a bus driver and on the first leg of your trip in your bus you are
going south,” etc.

Zero In on the Target
Keep that issue focused. The story is told of a father in the Swiss Alps
who sent his three sons out into the world. Before they made their departure
he took them to a mountainside and instructed them to bring their

crossbows. He said to the eldest one, “Aim your crossbow at the bird sitting
on the ground some fifty feet away.” The son did as instructed. The father
asked the question, “What do you see?” The son replied, “I see the beautiful
skyline, the gorgeous clouds, the majesty of God’s universe.” The father
said, “That’s good. Now lower your bow.”
The second son was instructed to raise his crossbow and aim at the bird
and he did. The father then asked the same question, “What do you see?”
The second son said, “I see the beautiful mountains, the rolling valleys, the
beautiful scenery with the rich grass.” The father said, “That’s good. Now
lower your bow.”
The youngest son was then instructed to raise his bow and aim it at the
bird, which he did. The father said, “What do you see?” The youngest son
said, “I see where the wings join the body,” and with that he released the
arrow, which flew straight to the mark.
Point: When you’re on a sales interview you have only one target, which
is to serve your customer by selling your goods or services.

35
The Keys in Closing—Conclusion
Of all of the keys in persuasion, undoubtedly the one which is the most
misunderstood is the eighth, the “Key of Persistence.” Many people think
the persistent salesperson is the one who “sits” on the prospect and says,
“Aw, you know you’re going to get it sooner or later, SIGN HERE!” Or
“You know you want it, go ahead and SIGN,” or “The only way you can get
it is to SIGN HERE, so SIGN HERE.” That’s not persistence; that’s just
plain, unadulterated pressure. All you do is irritate people when you take
that approach. I thoroughly covered that subject in chapter 4, so let’s look
now at what persistence really is.
Persistence is a good word, but I believe a better word is belief. I’m
convinced if you really believe the product you’re selling will solve a
problem for the person you’re dealing with, you will be reasonably insistent
he take action in his own best interests. You’ll do it professionally—
pleasantly—politely—but you will persist.

The “Pressure Belief” Close
The word persistence took on a new meaning for me several years ago. I
was on a speaking tour of Australia and met John Nevin, who at that time
was the managing director for World Book Encyclopedia. His story is the
classic “rags to riches” one. He started his World Book career as a part-time
representative. He had a milk route and sold World Book in the afternoons
and evenings. His dedication, hard work, and mental agility enabled him to
move quickly up the management ladder to the position of managing
director.

Early in his World Book career, John made a call on a recently arrived
German immigrant and his wife and son. The couple really looked more
like grandparents than parents. They married late in life and their first and
only child came along when the wife was forty-two years old.

“Tank You, Young Man”
John arrived for the appointment at about eight o’clock, and it was after
midnight when he finally made the sale. Many salespeople would never
stay with a prospect that long. But John said to me, “You know, Zig, after I
finally made the sale the little lady escorted me out through the front gate
because they had a big dog in the yard. Outside the gate, the short, stocky
mother reached up and put her hand on my shoulder and in that guttural
German accent which was difficult to understand, she said, ‘Tank you,
young man, for staying till we understand what these books do for our boy.
Tank you, tank you, tank you!’ ”
John and the couple had a serious communications problem because of
their unfamiliarity with the English language. They understood some things,
but it was necessary for John to talk very slowly and repeat himself many
times. Finally, it got through to the couple that the World Book
Encyclopedia would make a difference in the education of their son. Later,
John said, “You know, I hate to think I ever missed a sale because I was not
communicating and the prospect was not properly understanding what my
product would mean to him.” Message: The true professional wants the
prospect to own the product so badly he strives for the yes decision again
and again.
As a salesperson you must also understand that many times the prospect
is sold on what you’re selling but he’s been had before. He’s made mistakes
earlier by acting too quickly, and what he really wants to know is, “Do you
[the salesperson] really believe what you are selling is for my benefit, or are
you just trying to sell me so you will benefit?”

Make Certain You Pass the Test

Many times the prospect will ask you some questions which really don’t
make sense. He’s trying to find out if you’re going to stick to the story you
told him earlier. He’s checking you out. Many times I’ve made the sale (and
so have you) after I’d been with the prospect a long time, only to have the
prospect look at me, grin, and say, “I was going to buy this all the time. I
just wanted to find out what you would say.”
That’s what they said, but I’m convinced they were really checking the
depth of my own conviction as to what the product would do for them. One
more time. From Cavett Robert, “The depth of your belief is far more
important than your oratorical eloquence and sales phraseology.”

Some Persistence Ideas
It has been said—and I believe it’s true—that many times the prospect
will literally test you at least three times just out of curiosity to see exactly
what you will say. Obviously, some people—particularly those who are not
knowledgeable about selling—will label it as “pressure” if a salesperson
doesn’t take the first no as the final word.
In chapter 30 I discussed how to get permission to use “pressure,” so I
won’t repeat it here. Let me point out, however, that over the years I’ve
asked hundreds of people to identify pressure and I’ve gotten answers from
all over the ballpark. Salespeople themselves say they don’t like highpressure salesmen but then seem to be unable to identify what the word
means.
I’m convinced it’s not so much what it means to us as salespeople but
what the prospect we’re dealing with at the moment feels about it. That’s
another reason I keep saying you need to be sensitive to the other person.
One prospect might feel terribly uncomfortable if you give him the second
reason he should buy. Another one thrives on that very thing and loves to
see a salesperson who is gung ho about what he’s doing and who so
fervently believes the prospect benefits from the purchase that he will try
again and again to make the sale.

The Best I’ve Heard
Frank Bettger, in his magnificent book How I Multiplied My Income and
Happiness in Selling, explained pressure this way: “I don’t want to give

anyone the impression that I am a high-pressure salesman. That is if I
understand what the term ‘high-pressure’ means. Just so long as I can forget
myself and what I am going to make out of a sale, and keep my mind on the
other person and what he will get out of the sale, I have no fear of creating
the impression that I am high-pressure.”
Is this pressure? You’re in the real estate business. You’ve just shown a
couple a home which they obviously love. It’s exactly what they’ve
dreamed of owning, but they are procrastinators who hesitate to make
decisions. They’re gracious, pleasant, and friendly but hesitant to decide.
From your perspective you positively know at least one other couple is also
seriously interested in that home. Are you doing the current prospect a favor
by smiling and saying, “Well, I don’t want to rush you into anything and I
certainly don’t want to pressure you into making a decision, so as soon as
you make up your mind, let me know”? The couple responds that they
really appreciate your consideration and they’ll be back in touch the next
day.
Problem: That very afternoon the other couple who was interested comes
in and buys the home. I’m convinced that you would have been far more
loving, caring, concerned, and professional if you had taken this approach:
Truthfully point out to the prospects that you want them to make the right
decision and that you don’t want them to feel rushed. However, if they are
sincerely interested in the home, they should put a binder on it to secure it,
because another couple is also interested in the home and for exactly the
same reasons they are.
You actually flatter your prospect when you do this because you’re
complimenting them on their judgment—that they like the home for the
same reason the other people like it. In short, both couples have good
judgment.

Go Ahead, Doctor, Do What Is Best
In 1981 a close personal friend and business associate went to his dentist.
The diagnosis was that, because of some problems with his teeth as a young
boy, he needed nine crowns. As you know, that involves a considerable
amount of time and money, so my friend asked if some teeth needed crowns
more than others. The dentist replied that five should be done right away,

but there was no immediate rush for the other four. With this information,
he decided not to have all nine done but did go ahead with the five.
Several years later, my friend still has not had the other four crowned.
Question: Was his dentist practicing either good dentistry or good selling?
Answer: No, on both counts. As a professional salesman, one simple
question would have revealed that my friend’s dental bill was covered as
one of the company benefits which he enjoys. As far as dentistry is
concerned, my advisers point out three very significant facts concerning the
delay for the other four crowns.
First, they say piecemeal dentistry is never as attractive or effective as a
completed project. In short, the dentist can do all nine at the same time and
have a better chance of a more complete success with matching colors and
results than if he crowns five at one time and the other four at a later date.
Second, although the possibilities are slim, they do exist that a tooth
deterioration could occur quite rapidly and my friend might end up losing
one or more of the other four teeth. Admittedly, the chances are small
because he has had his teeth checked since he received those five crowns.
At that point the dentist rather casually mentioned that he still needed those
other crowns but did not suggest setting a date. Since the dentist was casual
about the need, my friend was just as casual about getting the crowns.
From a dentistry point of view, the odds are great that the price of
crowns, like everything else, will have increased substantially during the
intervening time period between the first five and the final four, whenever
that might be. Additionally, the time involvement for one project, namely,
having nine crowns, as versus two projects, meaning five crowns on this
go-round and four crowns for the second series of visits, will be
considerable. Obviously, there is some risk involved when a professional
encourages a patient to take action. However, when your prospects or
patients depend on you for your professional advice, you should be willing
to take some risk.

Now You Have Two Problems
If there is some indication the prospect is growing uncomfortable with
your persistence, you might smile and say, “You know, Mr. Prospect, when
you and I started talking you had one problem. Now you have two, because

you’ve got to get rid of me.” Smile as you say this and continue by saying,
“Now the second problem is easy to solve. All you’ve got to do is ask me to
leave and I’ll be gone in the twinkling of an eye. But that would still leave
you with the first problem. So why don’t we spend a few more minutes
together and see if we can solve that problem as well. Is that fair enough?”
or “Does that make sense?”
Another approach: “Don’t misunderstand, Mr. Prospect, I’m not here to
put the monkey on your back—I’m here to take him off your back. That’s
what our goods or services will do and that is what you want to have
happen, isn’t it?”
One excellent reason for persisting is that’s where you really learn to sell.
After all, the toughies are the teachers. The ones who resist are the ones
who force you to use the imagination, skill, and knowledge reserve you’ve
been accumulating over a period of time.
There’s another side to the coin. Sometimes your prospects are confused
about their belief in what you’re selling and their desire for ownership.
They’re not sure they really trust you, so they persist by asking a number of
questions which are not consistent with whether or not they’ve been
listening to you.
On occasion some of these skeptical prospects will ask some shallow
questions just to see how you will respond. They want to see if they can
“get under your skin.” They want to check you out to find out if you’re
going to tell them the same thing you did earlier in the interview. I urge you
to be cautious here.
If a prospect asks you the same question, you don’t smile and say, “Well,
as I explained earlier . . .” When you do that, what you have done is called
him an idiot for not listening, and there is no way you can graciously call
another person an idiot. When the same question comes up again, you need
to act a little astonished and say, “Oh, my goodness! No wonder you’ve
hesitated until now to go ahead and make the decision, because that’s one of
the most important points. I’m pleased you brought it up, because when we
clarify this one, all doubt will be removed.” You clarify it, lean forward in
your seat, and say, “That removes the only obstacle between you and

ownership of the product, doesn’t it? Would you like me to ship this air
freight or by truck?”
Yes, persistence is an important key. Learn to use it—then use it but don’t
abuse it. Remember, in selling, those who hang in there often win because
they believe in what they’re doing, and as you have already learned, “The
will which weakens first strengthens the other.”

The Key of Inducement
The ninth key in closing the sale is the “Key of Inducement.” Chances
are good that if you have ever spent a few minutes with me, you have seen
my arrow-shaped diamond cuff links which the Redhead gave me on our
twenty-fifth wedding anniversary. I confess to a degree of prejudice, but I
honestly believe they’re the most beautiful (not the biggest) diamond cuff
links in the whole world.
When she gave me those cuff links, French-cuff shirts were not very
popular. I went to a dozen different stores in Dallas, Texas, looking for
French-cuff shirts and I could not find them anywhere. Not only could I not
find them, but I was virtually invited to take my future “looking for”
business to other stores. A typical conversation went like this. Zig: “Do you
have any French-cuff shirts?” Clerk (certainly not a salesman!): “No, we
don’t.” Zig: “Do you know where I might find them?” Clerk: “No, I don’t.
Besides, didn’t you see me talking to this other clerk? I’m busy!” That little
interchange is almost a literal truth.
The next spring, I was in Burlington, Iowa, speaking for the Chamber of
Commerce. After my talk I saw a gentleman in a white suit which I really
liked, so I asked him where he got it. He told me he bought it from Doyle
Hoyer, who runs Glasgow Clothiers in Fort Madison, Iowa. I commented
that I was going to go over there the next day and get one just like it. With
that he said, “I’ve got to go over there tomorrow morning, too, and I’ll be
glad to take you.”

After I met Doyle Hoyer the next day, the following conversation took
place. Zig: “Doyle, do you have a white suit?” Doyle: “What size?” Zig: “I
wear size forty-one.” Doyle: “Zig, I’ve got one in stock.” With that he
walked over, took the suit off the rack, and slipped the coat on me to check
the fit, which was perfect. All he needed to do was cuff the trousers and I
could walk out the door in that suit of clothes.
As Doyle measured me I asked, “Doyle, how long will it take me to get
this suit?” Doyle: “Well, Zig, you don’t leave until two o’clock, do you?”
Zig: “No, I don’t.” Doyle: “Man, you’re going to take this suit with you!”
He gave the suit to a young man who worked with him and said, “Take it
upstairs to the tailor and tell him I want this suit right away.”
Then with a twinkle in his eye, Doyle looked at me and said, “Now, Zig,
I’ve got something I really want to show you.”

The “I Can Get ’Em” Close
When I finished my shopping spree, almost as an afterthought I said,
“Oh, by the way, Doyle, do you have any French-cuff shirts?” Doyle gave
me an answer which was entirely different from the one I had been getting
in Dallas.
He said, “No, I haven’t,” but he said something else. “But I can get
them!” As a frustrated French-cuff-shirt seeker, those were beautiful words
to me! Before I left there I bought two suits, five pairs of slacks, and all the
good stuff that goes with them! As a follow-up a couple of weeks later,
Doyle called and asked, “Did you get your shirts?” Zig: “I sure did!” Doyle:
“How do you like them?” Zig: “Doyle, I love them!”
About two weeks later I was in the airport in Kansas City and I saw a
fellow wearing a beautiful suit. (You are now going to find out how I select
some of my clothes.) I walked over to him, complimented him on his suit,
and asked him about it. He was delighted to give me all the information
concerning the brand and his source for the suit. Armed with this
information, I called Doyle and asked if he had this particular suit. Doyle:
“No, I don’t . . . but I can get it.” A couple of weeks later he called me again
and asked, “Zig, did you get your suit?” Zig: “I sure did.” Doyle: “How do
you like it?” Zig: “I love it!”

About a month later I called Doyle again, but this time when he picked
up the phone he excitedly asked, “Zig! Are you still at the same phone
number?” Zig: “Yes, I am.” Doyle: “Man, I was just going to call you!” Zig:
“Yeah, and I know exactly what you were going to tell me, too!” Doyle:
“You do?” Zig: “Sure! You’re going to tell me you just got in a magnificent
new shipment of suits and at least half a dozen of them are especially made
for me. You’ve put my name on them and are shipping them to Dallas so I
can choose the ones I want and send the rest of them back to you.” Doyle:
“Zig, you are a genius!”
Now I need to make an important point. I am not color-blind, but I am
color-ignorant. I simply do not know which colors go together. Doyle picks
out a suit, selects a shirt, chooses a tie and socks, and sends them to me with
a note which says, “Zig, these go together.” Now I can understand that kind
of communication! Fortunately, the Redhead understands color
combinations, so when I forget or get fouled up in general about what goes
with what, she straightens me out.
My tailor is just a short distance from my house, so when Doyle Hoyer
sent me my clothes it was easy to have them altered as needed.

The “I’ll Treat You Right” Close
I’ll never forget the time he called me and raved about a beautiful new
navy blue cashmere sport coat. By the time he finished his eloquent and
enthusiastic sales talk, I had a fear the price tag would bear some
resemblance to the foreign-aid bill to Lower Slobovia, so I asked the
obvious question: “Doyle, how much does this magnificent creation cost?”
Doyle: “Don’t worry about it, Zig, I’m going to treat you right.” Actually, I
don’t know why I bothered to ask, because he always gave me the same
answer. I hasten to add that he has earned the right, over a period of many
years, to give me that answer.
Now what does “treat you right” mean? It means he’s going to be fair,
he’s going to be honest, he’s going to be aboveboard. It does not mean he
gives me his profit. You see, I happen to believe Doyle Hoyer needs and
deserves a profit. But it does mean he’s going to deal with his customers in
such a way that they will buy from him again and again. He’s a super
salesman who serves his customers.

The “And Then Some” Close
Doyle understands the three greatest words in selling are: and then some.
He keeps every promise he makes—and then some. The clothes he sells are
exactly what he says they are—and then some. In a nutshell, Doyle Hoyer
delivers more than he sells—he doesn’t sell more than he delivers. That is
the way to sell more in the tomorrows of life.
There is a second point which is important: There is no such thing as a
little sale. When Doyle got the six shirts for me, he had no way of knowing
how much business it would generate. I was a complete stranger who lived
eight hundred miles from his store and he had never heard of me. Yet he
went out of his way to make certain I got what I wanted and that I was
happy.
At the moment I have no idea how many clothes Doyle has sold to me
and because of me, but he says he gets from one to ten calls every week
because of my references to him in my speeches and recordings. I would be
comfortably confident in saying that his sales—because of the initial “little”
sale—must exceed a half million dollars, and who knows what will happen
now that this story is in print!
To quickly elaborate on that “no little sale” point, here’s a “little” real
estate story from the past that also makes the point: A young couple
contacted several real estate agents in Georgetown, Texas, seeking a place
to rent. Since rentals at the time were almost nonexistent, no one paid any
attention to them. Finally, they walked into the office of McLester &
Grisham. Instead of being laughed at, they got a bit of encouragement from
salesman Dennis Robillard, who said he’d try to help them.
After making two dozen phone calls he found a suitable apartment and
helped them move in. They were so appreciative they asked him to find
them a permanent home—in the $400,000 price range. The couple had an
income of about $10,000 a month from a newly established trucking firm,
plus an inheritance of 46,000 acres of land rich with uranium.
Message: Treat everyone as if he is a valuable customer. He is—or he
could be if he’s treated like one.
The Key of Inducement is tremendously important. It can be as little as a
smile or pleasantness in dealing with your prospects, or it can be as

significant as a cash discount. In my mind I see it as the personal touch, the
little courtesies you offer which make it easier for your customers to
function in their business and personal lives.

The Most Important Key
The tenth key is, without a doubt, the most important of all the keys. It is
the “Key of Sincerity.” Chances are excellent that if you are a successful
professional salesperson, you’ve had this experience. Someone bought from
you and then said, “You know, I don’t really know why I bought from you.
I’ve had three or four people trying to sell me the same product,” or “I don’t
know why I’m dealing with you, because for years I’ve been dealing with
someone else.” What he’s really saying is, “I trust you.” He is confirming
what I’ve repeated several times in this book. The most important part of
the sales process is the salesperson.

If you’ll recall, very early in this book I made it clear we would be
dealing not only with the sales process, but infinitely more important, we
would be dealing with the salesperson. Trust is critical and sincerity is the
key that opens the “I trust you” door.

Know the Author
Many years ago Charles Laughton, the famous English actor, was touring
America, reading the Bible to large audiences. He was a Shakespearean
actor with considerable dramatic skill. I personally never had the privilege
of hearing him read the Bible, but indications were great it was a very
moving, spiritual experience.
Once, after reading in a small Midwestern community in a large rural
church, Laughton’s audience was totally and completely silent. It was
almost as if God had made a special trip and was there among the people.
After what seemed like an eternity but probably involved no more than a
minute, a man who must have been about seventy years old stood up and
asked for permission to read the Bible. It was granted, and as the old man

started to read, it was apparent he was no Shakespearean actor. He did not
have the voice, the elocution, or the diction of the great Charles Laughton.
As he read, however, it became completely obvious to everyone present that
if this had been a Bible-reading contest, the great actor would have finished
a distant second. When the evening was over, a reporter went to Charles
Laughton and asked how he felt about having participated in such an event;
what was his reaction to the old man’s reading of the Bible? The English
actor thought for a moment, looked at the reporter, and said, “Well, I knew
the script and I knew it well, but this old man knew the Author.”
The point is clear and very simple. The old man had the added advantage
of being totally sincere and totally convincing because he had that deep
personal belief. With a deep personal belief in what you’re selling, you will
be able to communicate and transfer that feeling to the prospect, and the
Key of Sincerity will help you sell a lot of merchandise. By now it should
be crystal clear the sales world is no place for a phony. He just won’t make
it in the world of professional selling.

Just Like the Little Boy across the Street
Of all the sales closes in Secrets, this next one—even more than the
preceding ones—absolutely demands sincerity.
I’ve never seen sincerity and integrity more on display than they were in
a personal experience my son and I had several years ago. A few days
before Christmas, Tom and I went down to get a new bicycle for him. Many
years ago I could speak bicycle, but today “bicycle” is an entirely different
language. If you don’t believe me, just go down to a bicycle shop and listen
to the chitchat which takes place.
On this occasion Tom and I went to a Schwinn bicycle shop in North
Dallas. The owner was busy with a grandmother and her little grandson,
who were looking at a bicycle. The grandmother didn’t speak bicycle either,
so she had a precise list of exactly what she wanted on a specific bicycle,
including the size. The owner of the shop looked at the list and said, “Yes,
we have this bicycle and it comes in two sizes. Is the bicycle for this little
fellow here?” The grandmother said, “Yes, it is. The little boy across the
street has one like it and I want one exactly like his for my grandson.”

Owner: “Ma’am, your grandson is too small for this big bicycle and it
will not be safe for him to ride. You should get him the other bicycle, which
is identical in every way. It is the same price and quality but it is smaller,
and your grandson can handle it much more easily. It will be at least three
years before it will be safe for him to ride the larger bicycle.”
Grandmother: “No way. I want exactly the same bicycle the little boy
across the street has. I want the very best for my grandson.” Again the
owner tried to explain that it was the best, it was just smaller, and if her
grandson were riding the larger bicycle, he’d have to move so far from side
to side he would be unable to control it. The owner patiently pointed out
that her grandson could lose control and might fall, and if he happened to be
in the street, it could result in a very serious accident. The grandmother was
adamant. “No, sir, I want that bicycle, right there, exactly like the one the
little boy across the street has. If I can’t have the one I want, I don’t want
any.”
Then the owner did one of the most beautiful things I’ve ever seen a
professional salesman do. It set the standard for what I consider the
“professional” in the world of selling. He looked at that grandmother and
said, “Ma’am, you’re probably going to think I’m crazy, but I cannot sell
you the bicycle you want. It would not be safe for your grandson to ride,
and if anything should ever happen to him because I sold you a bicycle he
could not control, it would be on my conscience.” Incredibly enough, the
grandmother left in a huff.

The “Integrity” Close
I hope you don’t think the owner carried his integrity too far, and deep
down I don’t think anyone who is interested in building a sales career will
feel that way.
Here’s a man who can be trusted. I would be willing to send my son into
his shop with a check made out to him with the amount left blank. This man
has integrity and he really does care about his customers. It’s true that the
owner missed that sale, but as a direct result of “missing” that one, he has
probably made countless others.

The “Signature” Close

Now let’s look at the “Signature” Close, which I think is the most
powerful close in use today. Since I claim originality, I don’t suppose that
statement sounds overly modest, but I do hope you will indulge me in a
little pride of authorship.
I want to explain that this close will not work for everyone. It would be
absurd to use it for low-cost items such as cosmetics, household items, or
brushes. However, most companies that sell those items do a lot of
recruiting, and with a few changes in terminology which I share with you,
this is a powerful approach to get the procrastinator to make a decision.
This close is the final one to use in an interview. It is ineffective if you’ve
been laughing and joking throughout the interview. You must be serious and
come across as a sincere person. It will not work if you use it at the
beginning of the interview before you establish value. You must use a
number of other closes before this one in order to properly prepare your
prospect. This is the final effort to get the sale, and when you use the
“Signature” Close there is nothing left. It’s now or never.

Feel, Felt, Found
You must practice, drill, and rehearse before you use the “Signature”
Close because many times a prospect will say he doesn’t sign anything until
he talks to his wife, lawyer, or banker; sleeps on it; thinks about it; etc. You
respond with the oldest lead-in of them all: “I know exactly how you feel
because for a long time I felt exactly the same way. [Pause.] When I
analyzed it I found that everything I have or own which has any value to me
I acquired only after I signed my name” (feel, felt, found).
(At this point I want to emphasize that I’m going to use a smorgasbord
approach and give you far more examples to choose from than you should
use. Don’t ever use more than three, and if one doesn’t fit your own
personality or belief system, then don’t use it. Caution: Virtually anything
new in a tense situation such as closing will make you a little uncomfortable
until you master it and make it your own. Don’t be too judgmental in
deciding what to use. Try it—you might like it!)

Voice Emphasis on “Signed”

(Now the words after the feel, felt, found introduction.) Here’s the way I
use it: “Over fifty-six years ago, God gave me a beautiful woman, and I’m
one of the truly fortunate men in that I love her infinitely more today than I
did the day I got her. I got her because one day, in the presence of
witnesses, the minister, and Almighty God, I signed my name.
“I had four beautiful children—three daughters and a son. They were all
mine, but the doctor would not even let me take them out of the hospital
until I had signed my name.”

Nothing Happens—Until Somebody Signs Something
“I own a lot of life insurance. I bought it because I wanted to make
certain if anything happened to me, my family’s standard of living would
not decline and my wife would not have to go to work unless she wanted to.
I was able to protect my family’s financial future because on several
different occasions, in the presence of a competent salesperson, I signed my
name.
“I have some investments. I own some real estate, some CDs for
emergencies, a little piece of an oil well, and a couple of other investments.
I made those investments because I wanted to make certain when the day
comes that I am unable to do what I’m doing, I will be able to sit back and
take life easy without being a financial burden to anyone. I’ll be able to do
that because on many different occasions, in the presence of a salesperson, I
signed my name.”
Now I repeat myself as I say, “As a matter of fact, Mr. Prospect, I’ve
never made any progress of any kind, anywhere, or an acquisition of
anything of value until I committed myself by signing my name. Mr.
Prospect, if I’m reading you right—and I think I am—you’re the kind of
man who not only likes to make progress but who also likes to do things for
your family. You can do both of those things right now by signing your
name.” (Point to the line on the order blank and hand him the pen.)

You Feel Good—Even if You Miss
If the “Signature” Close is properly used, there is nothing else to say.
This is that one case in which you do not speak until the prospect speaks.
There is total silence, but in this specific case, the longer the prospect

remains silent the better your chance of making the sale. If there is a
significant objection, your prospect will make it known almost immediately.
In every case when I’ve used the “Signature” Close, whether I made the
sale or missed the sale, I’ve felt good. Obviously, I feel better if I make the
sale, but even if I miss it, I feel good because I know I have done
everything I can to get a positive decision. That’s good because it’s
important to the ego and feelings of the salesperson to know you’ve done
everything you can to get it, so you feel good about you. That’s important
for those future sales interviews.

The “Signature” Close for Recruiting Purposes
In this case you’ve thoroughly interviewed the prospect and are
convinced he can successfully handle your business, but he seems uncertain
and wants to “think about it” before he “signs up.” You: “I know exactly
how you feel and I’m delighted to see you take such a thoughtful approach
to this decision, because as a practical matter, if the decision is not right,
then both of us lose. As a matter of fact, I felt the same way you do just
______ years ago when I was confronted with the same decision. [Pause.] I
found there were many people in the company who had fewer qualifications
than I had but who were doing extremely well simply because they had said
yes to themselves. They didn’t have better skills or abilities, but they did
have a better opportunity.
“Think about it, Mr. Prospect. You’ve never made a single career
advancement by standing still and saying no. You didn’t acquire your wife,
your children, your home, or your savings account until you signed for
them. Each step forward—regardless of what you do—involves a
commitment on your part. In this particular case your signature, along with
my signature, says we are both committed to your success. The instant you
sign your name the opportunity door swings open, but until you sign it the
door is closed and nothing can or will happen. In short, Mr. Prospect, you
can open that door right now by signing your name.” (Be quiet. The ball is
in his court.)
There are hundreds of closes and variations of closes which can be used
whether you are selling goods, services, or recruiting. Again, especially for

recruiting purposes, they will have to be adapted to fit your special
situation.
One thing I have emphasized throughout Secrets is that as you acquire
technical expertise and the right words to persuade your prospect to take
action, the most important thing is your intent. Why do you want to make
the sale? Is your heart as well as your head completely in the transaction?
Do you really believe it’s in your prospect’s best interests to buy what you
are selling? That’s important—nay, critical—because that very belief is
your best, maybe your only, vehicle to outstanding success in this
magnificent sales profession.

36
The “Narrative” Close
To summarize and tie a lot of things together, I’m going to tell you a story
which will involve all of the keys we’ve been talking about. This is the
“Key of the Narrative Event.” A narrative key or narrative story is the most
effective way to use third-party influence to persuade your prospect to take
action. These are short vignettes which paint pictures of people or
companies that had problems “just like yours [the prospect] and solved their
problems by using our goods or services.” (Implication: You can buy our
goods or services and solve your problem.)
My purpose in telling this particular story is to give you, in story form, an
overview of this segment of Secrets of Closing the Sale. This review is
designed to trigger your imagination and memory so you will be able to
recall and use more of the information I have shared with you.
One Saturday morning in Columbia, South Carolina, when my son Tom
was three and a half years old, I walked into the den and said, “Let’s go to
the grocery store. I’ve got to buy some groceries.” He said, “OK, Daddy,”
hopped up, and slipped on his little boots, and we drove down to the store.
As we walked into the store, I turned right to pick up a grocery cart, but
Tom had seen a display of rubber balls, so he made a beeline for them. He
grabbed one of those rubber balls, ran over, and popped it into the shopping
basket.

Four Keys in Four Seconds
Now I’ve never talked at great length to my son about this particular little
trip, but I’ve got an idea that when I said, “Son, let’s go to the grocery
store,” one of the reasons he was so enthusiastic about going was he had an

idea. In his little mind he figured if he got his daddy down to that grocery
store, he was going to get himself something. He probably didn’t know
what it was going to be, but he figured it would be something. He was using
the Key of Positive Projection. Once we entered the store my son also used
the Key of the Assumptive Attitude, as well as the Key of Enthusiasm and
the Key of Physical Action. He “assumed” he was going to get that ball, so
he took “physical action” with a great deal of “enthusiasm.” In five seconds
he used four more keys on me!

What Would You Have Done?
I took the ball out of the basket and said, “Son, you’ve already got a
dozen balls and you don’t need another one, so take it back,” and I put it
into his hands. With that my son looked straight at me and said, “Daddy,
can I just hold the ball?”
Question: What would you have done? Remember, now, my son was just
three and a half years old. What kind of daddy would I have been to say,
“No, son, you can’t even hold the ball; now take it back!”? My son did not
want to buy the ball; he just wanted to hold it, and all he had done was ask
me a very simple “Subordinate Question.” (You don’t ask for the sale; you
ask for the appointment. On the appointment you ask for the sale. You don’t
ask for the good-night kiss; you ask for the date. On the date you sell the
good-night kiss.)
So I said, “OK, son, you can hold it, but don’t get any ideas. You’re not
going to buy it. You’ve already got a dozen and you just don’t need another
one.” We walked around shopping for a few minutes and came back by the
display of rubber balls. I took the ball out of my son’s hands, put it back in
the display, and said, “Son, that’s long enough. You’re going to fool around,
drop it, get it dirty, and then Dad’ll have to buy it, and you simply do not
need another ball.”

That’s Quite an Inducement

Apparently my son was not listening when I said no, because he ran back
around me, took that ball out of the display, and popped it right back in the
basket. He was a “Persistent” little salesman, any way you look at it. Well,
I’m kind of persistent myself, so I took the ball back out of the basket and
headed for the display to put it back, talking as I was walking. “Son, for the
last time, Dad’s already told you you’ve got a dozen balls; you just don’t
need another one.” As I was walking and talking, I looked down and there
he stood—all thirty-nine pounds of him. He looked up at me and said (at
that time he talked with a slight lisp), “Daddy, wis you buy me that ball. I’ll
give you a tiss.”

When you think about it for a moment, he was offering quite an
“Inducement.” He was offering himself. What else could a three-and-a-halfyear-old give his daddy but a part of himself? Since it was in the immediate
future, it was an “Impending Event.” And “Sincere”—in all of my years of
selling, I have never known a more sincere salesman than that three-and-ahalf-year-old.
You already know how the story ends, but I’ll go ahead and tell you. That
day in the Ziglar household we had thirteen rubber balls!
At this point I need to correct something. In chapter 31, I said to you I
had never seen that a woman had given birth to a salesman. Actually, that’s
not quite true, because on February 1, 1965, in Columbia, South Carolina,
the local paper carried a small headline which read, “Birth of a Salesman
Announced. Mr. and Mrs. Zig Ziglar announce the birth of a salesman, John
Thomas Ziglar, born February 1, Providence Hospital, 9:08 p.m.” Now I

don’t want you to get the wrong idea. I am not trying to influence my boy’s
career. I mean, he can sell anything he wants to!
That’s my message to you. If you will buy these ideas and use the keys,
procedures, and techniques we’ve been sharing, I sincerely believe you can
sell more of the goods or services you are selling.

To Build a Career
A lot is involved in building a sales career. I love this story Elmer
Wheeler told before his death. Once while across the border in Old Mexico,
he cut his finger and it had become infected. A bartender looked at the
finger and said, “Man, we had better do something about that infection!” He
took some tequila, put it into a shot glass full of ice, squeezed some lemon
juice in it, and said, “Now if you soak your finger in this several times a
day, it’ll solve your problem.”
I’m certain the medical community would not give its 100 percent
approval to the procedure, even though the astringent effect of the lemon
might contribute to the healing process. The old farmer would say, “Yup,
the ice is going to reduce the swelling, so there is a certain amount of
common sense involved.” The poet would testify that the juice of the
maguey plant would certainly have some value. A couple of days later all
the swelling had disappeared and there was no soreness in the finger.
What all of this really says is, “Take a little common sense, add some
scientific knowledge, throw in a little poetic philosophy, and you’ll get
results.”
To build a sales career, you need to acquire the knowledge made
available through sales trainers, books, recordings, and seminars. With that
knowledge you should weave in a poetic philosophy of life which says that
“you can have everything in life you want if you will just help enough other
people get what they want.”
To the knowledge and poetic philosophy, add the common sense of the
old farmer which says, “Friend, I don’t care what you do, know you’ve got
to work and work hard at seeing new prospects and servicing old
customers.” You have a moral obligation to work so hard at building your
sales career and becoming truly professional that, as my friend John Nevin

from Australia says, “If anyone ever sees you coming and says, ‘Here
comes a salesman,’ you won’t let him down.”

PART 7

Technology
and the Sales Professional

37
Technology
When I originally wrote Secrets of Closing the Sale, many of the devices
mentioned in this chapter had not yet been invented. For that reason I’ve
asked Michael Norton, one of our associates at Ziglar Training Systems and
an expert in advancing sales careers with the use of technology, to help me
with this chapter. I’m especially grateful for Michael’s expertise in this area,
and I know you will be, too.
Technology has been used for many years by sales professionals to
increase sales and to follow clients and prospects. Advancements in
technology will continue to develop more rapidly than books about how to
maximize technology can be written. As a sales professional, you are
responsible for identifying the technologies that best suit your needs and
adopting the technology your company provides to maximize sales and
selling time. But you must understand that technology can be used only to
enhance your sales skills and selling efforts—it cannot make the sale for
you. By coupling the sales techniques found in this book with current
technology, you will increase sales and become more efficient in your dayto-day selling.
Why should sales professionals use technology? Some salespeople have
been very comfortable and very successful using manual tracking processes
and have been able to survive without laptops, pagers, or PDAs. If that’s
your situation, you’ve obviously been in the sales profession for a very long
time and feel you don’t need to learn new technology to serve your client
base or interact with others in your company.
During the boom of the Internet in 1999 and early 2000, there were
rumors that the Internet might actually do away with the need for the sales

professional. That is absolutely not true. There may have been some
companies that believed the Internet would increase sales and allow them to
reduce the size of their sales staff or do away with it entirely, but they
quickly realized the need to maintain the sales professional–client
relationship and that the best way to increase sales and maximize efficiency
would be to marry the existing sales process with technology.
The ability to have information about your prospects, clients,
competitors, and industry just a mouse click away is truly powerful. Even
the sales veterans who have fought the technology revolution for so long
are seeing the many benefits these new tools can bring to their existing
selling style.
We can use technology to communicate with clients and prospects, and
we can use technology to communicate important information to our peers,
managers, and employers. The ability to access information about
scheduled appointments and the status of our progress with a client or
prospect, regardless of our immediate location, will help us reach our
ultimate goal as sales professionals—helping our clients get what they
want, which in turn helps us get what we want—increased sales.
If embraced and used properly, technology can simplify and enhance
your sales career. However, it is important not to get so caught up in
technology that you lose sight of what your role as a sales professional truly
is—relationship selling. Slipping into the habit of sending e-mails instead of
visiting the client, or using voice mail or e-mail instead of speaking directly
to the client or prospect, is easier than most people realize. You must
approach technology as an aid to your business and not use it as a crutch or
something to hide behind.
Another downside of current technology is the sometimes irresistible
appeal of the world wide web. On occasion, most of us are guilty of being
distracted from our business research or communication and drift onto other
appealing web sites such as golf, shopping, cooking, etc. There is a time
and place for those activities, but it is certainly not during work hours.
So as we continue to discuss the many technologies that are available to
you today, remember that closing the sale, building the relationships, and all

of the preparation and follow-up activities are still the responsibility of the
sales professional.
There are many types of technology available to you today. They include
but are not limited to:
Pagers
Cellular telephones
Laptop computers
Personal digital assistants (PDAs)
Blackberry / RIM devices
The Internet
Client/prospect information
Competitive information
Industry information Sales training,
sales tips, sales motivation
Incentive programs and gifts, travel arrangements, golf, etc.
E-mail
Lead sources
Sales force automation (SFA)/Customer relationship management (CRM)

Pagers
Pagers have long served the sales community well. However, with the
trend toward cellular telephones, pagers are slowly becoming a thing of the
past. Pagers are still quite useful in areas where cellular coverage is
unavailable, such as hospitals and large office buildings or remote
geographies. The advantage of the pager is that you still know who is trying
to reach you and you have the opportunity to contact that person, prospect,
or customer at your earliest convenience. However, living in a “now”
society in which expectations have changed, “your earliest convenience”
may not be fast enough for some folks. Since cellular telephones can be
programmed to identify the caller before answering, and you can set your
phone to “silent” or “meeting” so that you are not disturbed at an
inopportune time, they are making the pager somewhat obsolete. The

prediction in most business circles is that pagers will soon become a thing
of the past in the sales world but will maintain their place in the services
arena.

Cellular Telephones
Cellular telephones may very well be one of the greatest technological
advancements in recent times. We can communicate with our companies,
our prospects, and our clients from wherever we are. Although great care
and judgment should be used when operating your cellular telephone while
driving, time that was previously wasted now provides the sales
professional with an opportunity to make follow-up calls, return phone
calls, and touch base with our homes or places of employment. It is also
recommended that while using your cellular telephone in your vehicle you
invest in an earpiece or hands-free attachment that will allow you to keep
two hands on the wheel and talk at the same time. Previously the only way
to capitalize on driving time was to go through “Automobile University,”
listening to audiotapes and CDs to enhance personal and professional
development. You can still listen to the tapes and programs that will help
you grow professionally, but you can also return important phone calls or
take care of follow-up activities between sales calls.
Cellular telephones come in a variety of shapes, sizes, and colors to meet
your individual needs. Depending on the brand you choose, you can also
use your cellular telephone for storing contact information, Internet access,
text messaging, and even playing games. Rate plans for cellular telephones
vary, and with a little coaching from your local wireless provider, you can
quickly identify the appropriate rate plan based on your actual needs and
usage patterns. If you should choose the wrong rate plan, don’t worry; you
can change your rate plan as often as you need to. For instance, you may
have a month of heavy travel coming up and you may need more roaming
minutes. All you need to do is contact your carrier and ask for the
appropriate plan. When you know that your travel is coming to an end, just
call your carrier and change the plan again to meet your needs. Many
people are unaware that they have the flexibility to change plans when they
need to. The confusion comes from the contract or agreement they sign.
The agreement states that they must remain with the carrier for a specific

period of time; however, the customer has the right to change the plan
whenever he or she chooses.
Your cellular telephone provides you with the ability to respond quickly
to customer needs and concerns. Take advantage of that. If you receive an
e-mail message or voice-mail message from a client and you have the
ability to respond immediately, why not do it? Your customer will be
impressed, your prospect will reward your prompt response with an order,
and your company will recognize your enthusiasm. Truly this technology
can advance the sales professional’s career if used properly.

Laptop Computers
Laptop computers are lighter, faster, and more powerful than ever before.
Although somewhat of a nuisance to the business traveler in today’s
security-conscious airports, the value your laptop delivers outweighs the
inconvenience of carting it through the airport.
Your laptop can serve as your portable prospect or customer database,
and you can even use it for product demonstrations. If you are traveling,
whether by road, rail, or air, you can use your laptop to access e-mail
messages and faxes, respond to e-mails, write follow-up or thank-you
letters, generate expense reports, review presentations prior to your
meeting, and so much more.
Manufacturers of laptop computers are eager to please the customer and
offer a variety of standard models to choose from, but they are also willing
to customize your laptop based on your specific needs. Those needs can
include the amount of storage space or memory you need, the speed or
power you need, and your need for graphics and artwork. Dell, Gateway,
Compaq, Hewlett Packard, and IBM are the more common providers of
laptops, and you should investigate each supplier before making your
purchasing decision. If you explain your needs to the salesperson, he or she
will make certain you get the right laptop computer for you.

PDAs
Personal digital assistants (PDAs) can also be of great benefit. These
devices have seen significant growth and development over recent years
and provide a variety of services that can be very useful and convenient for

the sales professional. Typically, users identify the primary services of their
PDAs as maintaining their calendar, schedule, contact list, address book,
and to-do list or task list, and for some advanced models or users, sending
and receiving e-mail messages.
One obvious huge benefit of the PDA is its portability. PDAs can easily
fit into any compartment in your laptop case, your purse, your jacket
pocket, or even your pants pocket. You can buy an accessory piece that
allows you to wear the device on your belt. This allows you to carry one
small device that houses all of your customer/prospect information, family
and friends’ addresses and phone numbers, important notes and messages,
and your to-do’s or goals for the day. All PDAs have a built-in calculator,
and some have the ability to store and play games.
Technological advancements will make these devices smarter, faster,
more powerful, and probably even smaller and easier to manage or carry.
For those of us who have a hard time with the small keypad or stylus, most
devices can be plugged into a larger keyboard, making typing longer notes
or e-mails a bit easier.
All PDAs will synchronize with the program or programs of your choice
—Microsoft Outlook, your home desktop software that came with your
device, your e-mail service, etc. Although the PDA is highly automated,
you are required to manually sync your device when necessary. This will
allow you to keep the information that is stored on your laptop or desktop
computer in your personal digital assistant.

Blackberry/Rim Devices
Blackberry/Rim devices have gained a lot of favorable publicity recently.
These devices are miniature, handheld PDAs that have the built-in
capability to send and receive e-mail as well as access the Internet. These
devices are especially useful for someone who receives a lot of e-mail
messages and travels or is away from his or her desk frequently. The good
news is that it is easy to receive and read your e-mail messages on these
devices. The bad news is that you can easily get caught up in your e-mails
and forget your number one mission—selling.

E-Mail

We have discussed e-mail capability in several of these devices, but let’s
look at e-mail as its own technology and how it relates to the sales
profession. E-mail is certainly a great advancement in terms of our ability to
communicate with one another. We can send messages at any time of day or
night and know that our message will be received. We can program our
message so that the recipient must acknowledge that he or she has received
it. We can communicate quick answers to questions without getting caught
up in personal conversations, if that is what we want or need to do at the
time.
It is again important to note that e-mails can take away that personal
touch from communication with prospects, clients, family, and friends.
Whenever possible, it is far better if you respond to people in person or with
a phone call. But if they have reached out to you via e-mail, or if they have
indicated that their preferred method of communication is e-mail, then
respect their wishes and respond in kind. Still, when you get the opportunity
to see someone in person, or in today’s vernacular, “have face time,” take
advantage of it. For instance, if a client or prospect sends an e-mail request
for a sample of your product or a brochure, try to deliver it in person.
However, if they ask a simple question and need a quick answer, respond
via e-mail but remember to follow up in person the next time you interact
with them.
Don’t hide behind e-mail. If there is a problem with a customer or
prospect, meet it head-on. Use e-mail to schedule an appointment with the
individual you need to see, but don’t try to resolve an important issue via email.
Some folks use e-mail to try to gain entry into an account when all other
methods have failed. This has proven to be an effective strategy in some
cases, but direct calling has still proven more effective.
Use e-mail to send your weekly updates and forecasts to management.
Let your superiors know what you are doing and what you have
accomplished. It is so much easier than faxing, especially if there are
multiple people who need the information. You can use e-mail to share
success stories and strategies with others in your company. E-mail is a great
way to send a broadcast message to others in the sales department if you are
having a particular challenge in closing an account. Send out the objection,

concern, or challenge, and see if someone else has faced the same situation
and ask what he or she did to win the opportunity.
Be courteous when sending e-mail messages. Try to be as brief and
succinct as possible whenever you can. A good rule of thumb is to try to
limit your message to one screen, meaning do not make the recipient scroll
down to read your entire message. There are certain times when it is
appropriate to use more text, but more often than not you can deliver your
message within one screen. The idea is to get enough information to the
recipient that you can follow it up with an in-person visit, during which you
may have the opportunity to make a sale, add to an existing order, or ask for
a referral. Use e-mail to get in front of your clients and prospects.
Another valuable benefit of e-mail is that you can send information that
may be of interest to clients and prospects. This is a good way to build
relationships. You may choose to send them information about their own
company, their competitors, or their industry in general. You may also wish
to send them information about personal subjects that you know are of
interest to them, like sports scores or team updates, fishing, golf, cooking,
etc. You can easily attach a link to an e-mail that will allow them to see the
press release or information. This is an excellent way to keep a line of
communication open between you and your client or prospect, and it shows
your personal attention and interest.
Treat your in box like you would your desk. The best way to keep your
desk from clutter is to deal with each piece of paper just one time. You file
it, respond to it, throw it in the trash, forward it, or do something else with
it. Your e-mail should be the same. Deal with each e-mail only once if you
can. Reply, forward, delete, or file for later, but get it out of your in box. If
you don’t, you will soon have hundreds of e-mails in your in box.
Using e-mail to let friends and loved ones know you are thinking about
them is a great way of staying in touch. During a break you can send quick
notes just to let them know you love them and are thinking about them.
Especially if you travel, this is a good way to stay close to those who are at
home.
The Internet is such a powerful tool for businesses today. It is a great
source of free information to anyone who has access to the world wide web,

and a source of even more detailed information for those willing to pay a
premium for access to specific web sites—for example,
www.hooversonline.com. You can visit such a web site and get free general
information about a company, an industry, a prospect, or a competitor. Or
you can pay a subscription and receive very detailed information about
those same categories, such as the names of top officers within the
company.
Imagine starting your selling day by listing all the appointments you have
that day or calls you know you have to make that day and researching each
company via the Internet before you visit them or make the call. You can
visit their web sites and see any new press releases, product releases, and
information. This is a great way to break the ice with a customer or
prospect. You can go as deep as you want in your research, finding out
about their competitors or their industry in general. This is how you set
yourself apart from your competition. Your clients and prospects will view
you as an expert in the field and look to you for news and guidance.
The Internet also provides the sales professional with a variety of sites
that allow you to access sales training and sales tips. You can start each
selling day with a quick visit to your favorite sales web site, like
www.ziglartraining.com, for a sales tip of the day. Another such site is
www.sellingpower.com, and there are many others. By coupling technology
with “Automobile University,” you will make great strides in both personal
and professional growth.
The hazard of the Internet was mentioned earlier, but it certainly warrants
revisiting. It is very easy to get caught up searching the world wide web for
things that are not relevant to your personal or professional life, and even if
there are interests worth searching for, that should be done on your own
time and not during valuable selling time. Sell now, surf later. Adopt that
philosophy and you will reap the many benefits that the Internet has to
offer, both personally and professionally.
Search engines can be very useful for a sales professional seeking
information. For example, www.google.com, www.askjeeves.com,
www.yahoo.com, and others all offer you the ability to search the Internet
for just about any topic, subject, or question and will point you to multiple
sites or sources for the answers. You can use this type of service to answer

questions for your clients and prospects or to gain valuable insights into
products and services offered by your competition.
There are many valuable web sites for the use and benefit of sales
professionals. There are sites that help you locate radio stations while you
are traveling through different cities, sites that help you map out directions
from one destination to the next, sites that allow you to purchase gifts for
clients and prospects, and sites that help your organization build incentive
programs for your sales team. If you are a traveling salesperson, you know
that you can arrange your entire travel schedule via the Internet—air travel,
hotels, rental cars, and directions are all just a point and click away. Some
sites offer discounted services or special pricing on hotels and airfare. Just
be careful as to your arrival time and departure time needs, as some of the
discounted tickets come with restrictions on time changes. Discounted
tickets may also dictate connecting flights that may not work for your
particular trip.

Lead Sources
Lead sources are another valuable service the Internet can offer. As a
sales professional, you can purchase lists of customers by geography, by
SIC code, by zip code, by industry, etc. Many sites publish this information
or make these lists available, such as www.infousa.com and
www.zapdata.com. These sites allow you to categorize your requests and
search by company size, revenue, number of employees, telephone
numbers, addresses, and more. They also allow you to receive the
information via traditional hard copy or mail, or you can download the
information directly into Excel or your contact management software.
Contact management software or sales force automation (SFA) tools
allow you to manage your sales pipeline, accounts, contacts, and activity.
You may be familiar with some of the companies or products such as ACT,
Goldmine, Siebel, SalesLogix, and Microsoft Outlook, and maybe less
familiar with the web-based or ASP models such as SalesForce.com,
OracleSalesOnline.com or Upshot.com. Although most consider all of this
type of technology a management tool and not a sales tool, once you as a
sales professional embrace the use of SFA tools or contact management
tools, you will soon realize how much more efficient you can be.

Increased awareness of your pipeline and relative activities or next steps,
having your client/prospect information at your fingertips and searchable in
multiple formats, having sales summary and pipeline activity available to
management without needing to submit reports or information, and having
more efficient documentation—all a result of using today’s technology—
will result in more selling time and more sales.
If you haven’t been using the available technology to advance your sales
career, start today. You can easily overcome your fear of the unknown by
getting into action. Ask your sales associates who use laptops, PDAs, and
other devices that seem foreign to you, either to teach you how to use the
devices or to help you do a web search to find places where you can take
the courses you need. The key to getting and keeping clients these days is
availability. He who responds most quickly and with the most pertinent
information gets the sale.

Thank You
Secrets of Closing the Sale has made me even more aware of my
indebtedness to the tens of thousands of salespeople who have gone before
me. These pioneers blazed new frontiers, opened new doors, learned new
procedures, and established the credibility of the profession. To a large
degree these men and women left me a heritage which I proudly claim.
When you start to say thank you in a book of this kind, you invariably
leave out some important contributors. If I have overlooked you, and others
who have meant so much to this work, it’s simply an indication of another
of my human frailties. Please know that your efforts and help are
appreciated, and I apologize in advance for not including you.
I start with my friend Bill Cranford, to whom I dedicated this book. He
taught me the first principles of professional selling. Mr. P. C. Merrell also
taught me some important sales principles and “sold” me the idea that I
could be a sales champion. My surrogate father, Mr. John Anderson, and
my first free-enterprise mentor, Mr. Walton Haining, taught me a great deal
about getting along with people and communicating with them on their
level. I believe that Secrets of Closing the Sale qualifies as a unique book if
for no other reason than the fact that I have been so ably assisted by a
number of truly outstanding people and one major company which
unselfishly shared a considerable amount of its research.
Heading that list would be Mike Frank of Columbus, Ohio; Billie
Engman of San Mateo, California; D. John Hammond of Phoenix, Arizona;
and Bernie Lofchick of Winnipeg, Canada. I say without hesitation that
with the aid of the four of them I must have made a minimum of three
hundred changes in what I have written. Not only were they generous in
their praise, but more importantly, they were constructive in their evaluation
and enthusiastic with their positive suggestions to make the book more
effective for you. In several cases their help enabled me to keep some egg

off my face. Though I do mention each one several times, I want to
emphasize that without their help, combined with the significant
contributions of the others, this book would not be as effective as it is.
When the manuscript was roughly 80 percent complete, I sent these
people copies and asked them for evaluations, suggestions, and additions, as
well as corrections. Each went above and beyond just being close friends in
their zeal and enthusiasm for helping. I asked them specifically because,
without exception, they have outstanding sales backgrounds and a
combined knowledge that surpasses any group with which I’ve had the
privilege of working. Each one made not just one or two but literally dozens
of invaluable suggestions.
I am also indebted to Mrs. Juanell Teague of Dallas, Texas, and Gerhard
Gschwandtner, publisher of Personal Selling Power, as well as Phil Lynch
and Bryan Flanagan of Dallas. Their suggestions and insights were
extremely helpful.
I’m deeply indebted to The Forum Corporation of Boston,
Massachusetts, for making the study done by William M. DeMarco, Ph.D.,
and Michael D. Maginn, Ed.D., available to me. These researchers did a
study involving twelve “Fortune 1300” companies with large sales forces
from six industries (high-tech, banking, petro-chemical, insurance,
pharmaceutical, and communications). The study involved 341 carefully
selected salespeople—173 high performers and 168 moderate performers.
They acquired 44,741 pieces of data over a period of fourteen months.
Information from their findings is scattered and identified throughout the
book.
No list of thank-yous would be complete without a special one to my
younger brother, Judge Ziglar, whose book Timid Salesmen Have Skinny
Kids gave me some invaluable ideas which I utilized freely throughout this
book. Jim Savage, then our vice-president of corporate training, was
extremely helpful with his editorial comments, sales suggestions, and
creative ideas.
My thanks also extends to the entire staff of the Zig Ziglar Corporation,
who carried double burdens while I secreted myself at our lake home and
wrote much of this book. Of necessity, several members of the staff handled

their regular jobs as well as some of the things I should have been doing
myself. Thank you to Ron Ezinga, then president of the Zig Ziglar
Corporation, and Denny Roossien, then executive vice-president, who
relieved me completely of most of my responsibilities and helped make this
book possible.
A double-special thank-you goes to my administrative assistant, Laurie
Magers. If any man ever hit the jackpot in an executive assistant, the author
of this book certainly did. Not only did Laurie do the work beautifully and
skillfully, but she mastered a new word processor in order to do so. I
include an entire segment in Secrets on “Professionals”—no book could be
completed without professional help—and Laurie Magers is certainly
professional in every respect. It’s also significant that her “bragging” on the
book as she typed the manuscript kept me excited and encouraged. Thank
you, Laurie.
If you are even casually familiar with my work, you undoubtedly know
that I never undertake any major project without the knowledge, support,
and enthusiastic help of the Redhead, my wife and my life for over fifty-six
beautiful, fun-filled years. Thank you, Sugar Baby, for being you, for being
mine, and for always being there.
To the salespeople of America, who are, in my mind, the real heroes of
this century, I also want to say thank you. We still have much to do
regarding our profession, but much progress has been made. I’m fervently
convinced that as you read and apply the principles in this book, you will be
more professional, and the net result is that all of us— including the
salesmen of the future—will benefit from it.

Notes
1. When I talk about my one and only since November 26, 1946, I refer to her as “the Redhead.”
When I talk to her, I call her “Sugar Baby.” Her name is Jean.
2. For simplification I often use “product” instead of “product, goods, or services.”
3. For clarification: For simplicity and clarity, when “salesperson” is cumbersome I substitute
“salesman.” “Man” in salesman (or chairman) means and etymologically has always meant “person.”
Even in the Sanskrit word for “man,” the root “man” means “human being.” Homo sapiens means
male and female alike. Unless limited by context, mankind means and has always meant “humanity
entire.” (Was Paul Revere a “minute-person”?) I am indebted to Reader’s Digest’s “Word Power” and
the Berkeley Publishing Group for this information.
4. A yellow or white pad to do your figuring. This procedure clarifies the offer and makes it more
believable and understandable. Many people don’t buy because they don’t understand.
5. The I CAN course is currently distributed by an independent organization, The Alexander
Resource Group, headed by Bob Alexander. For information on the course, contact Bob Alexander,
Pres., The Alexander Group, 176 Lake View Dr., N., Macon, GA 31210. Phone: 877-USA-ICAN.
Web site: www.yesican.net.
6. At this point, you’d be more than willing to call us at 1-800-527-0306 (in Texas 972-233-9191)
to order by using VISA, MasterCard, or American Express, wouldn’t you? If you don’t want to use
your credit card, you’re going to mail your check to Ziglar Training Systems, 2009 Chenault Dr.,
Carrollton, TX 75006, aren’t you?

Available from Ziglar only
Ziglar has developed many products, programs, and seminars for
individual, business, church, and school involvement.
• audio and video programs on personal growth and sales training
• a motivational course called I CAN now in use by thousands of schools
and families
• one- to four-day seminars, some on cruise ships, on goal setting, sales,
and personal motivation
These and other products/programs are available only from Ziglar. Please
write or call:
Ziglar
15303 Dallas Pkwy Ste 550
Addison, TX 75001
Toll free 800-527-0306
In Texas 972-233-9191

Zig Ziglar is an internationally renowned speaker and author. His client list
includes thousands of businesses, Fortune 500 companies, U.S. government
agencies, churches, schools, and nonprofit associations. He has written
twenty-two books, including See You at the Top, Raising Positive Kids in a
Negative World, Top Performance, Success for Dummies, Over the Top, and
Zig: The Autobiography of Zig Ziglar. Nine of his books have been on bestseller lists, and his books and tapes have been translated into more than
thirty-eight languages and dialects.

ACHIEVE YOUR

TOP
PERFORMANCE!
Excellence: You expect it of yourself. You expect it of those
around you. Learn how to make it a reality in your life—at home,
at work, at play.
No matter what your profession is, Top Performance will help
you become your best, motivate others to excel, and boost the
quality of your organization.

“If anyone ever wanted a blueprint for success and leadership, Top
Performance will be the book to read.”
—Dave Liniger,
chief executive officer,
RE/MAX International, Inc.
“Top Performance is the very best book on life and motivation I
have ever read.”
—Lou Holtz, head coach,
University of South Carolina,
former head coach Notre Dame University
“To call Zig Ziglar a ‘super salesman’ would be an
understatement.”
—Richard M. DeVos, president,
Amway Corporation

FREE
Did you know Zig has a newsletter Did you know Zig has an
Internet newsletter distributed to tens of thousands of people every
week? Timeless quotes, timely tips, and the wisdom and wit from
one many refer to as “the mentor to the masses.” Plus, you will
have access to various discounts and promotional specials on
books, tapes, and distributed to tens of thousands of people every
week? Timeless quotes, timely tips, and the wisdom and wit from
one many refer to as “the mentor to the masses.” Plus, you will
have access to various discounts and promotional specials on
books, CDs, DVDs, and seminars offered only to our subscribers!
seminars offered only to our subscribers!

THE GOOD NEWS…
You can subscribe today and receive two FREE gifts with your
subscription You can subscribe today and have access to the tools
to experience success like you’ve (no purchase necessary)! Do it
today and we’ll

SEE YOU OVER THE TOP!

www.zigziglar.com

Zig has often stated that he would rather train his employees and LOSE
them than NOT train them and keep them—a spirited statement that speaks
volumes about the heart of Ziglar. Through years of development and
refinement, Ziglar has evolved into a world-renowned training company
covering myriad disciplines based on the belief that you build better
companies by building better people.
Working to improve your company performance is our business. Whether it
is improving sales skills within your sales department, instructing middle
managers to manage their team more effectively, teaching better
presentation skills to the executive branch, or becoming a customer-focused
organization, Ziglar is equipped and ready to assess needs, identify
strengths, and provide curriculum to meet your training agenda.
Contact a Ziglar sales professional for more information on how to take
your company from where it is to where you want it to be.

1.800.527.0306

THE ZIGLAR VAULT
The Ziglar Vault contains a complete library of Zig Ziglar’s best audio and
video programs and exclusive Vault material available to you for a monthly
subscription of only $14.97!
You would pay thousands of dollars to own everything on CD and DVD,
but for only $14.97 per month you can have access to all of them online
24/7.
There are over 100 hours of audio and video content in the Ziglar Vault
right now, including these best-selling programs:
• How to Stay Motivated
• Christian Motivation for Daily Living
• Courtship After Marriage
• A Conversation on Character
• Secrets of Closing the Sale
And many more!!!
SPECIAL BONUS – as a paying member you also get 1 FREE download
each month as part of your subscription, a $9.97 value. Now you can take
Zig with you to use in Automobile University or on your MP3 player. For
more information, log on to: http://www.ziglar.com/vault.

ZIGLAR VT
Ziglar VT offers on-demand, web-based training solutions for employees at
all levels through audio and video modules. Corporations can house their
entire in-house training library on the Vault, combining the breadth of Zig
Ziglar’s personal and corporate training programs with all of your in-house
training initiatives. Ziglar VT provides an extremely cost effective solution
for on-boarding, customer service, sales training, presentation skills, time
management, leadership and personal development training.
What would it mean for your staff to be able to access the necessary
training for their job exactly when they need it? When someone on your

staff needs to know a specific competency do they know where to go? Can
they find the answers at their fingertips, never having to leave their office?
Your staff will have up-to-the-minute just-in-time training that keeps
productivity soaring.
PLUS they will have access to the complete Zig Ziglar library with the best
of his audio and video programs and exclusive material for Vault
subscribers only. Your staff can learn the skill and be motivated to put it in
to action with Ziglar VT.

